<h2>Preface.</h2>
		<p>The epic poem of Gu-drun is one of the most important early literary works of the German race. It is attributed to the latter part of the twelfth or the beginning of the thirteenth century, and to a date a little subsequent to that of the Nibelungen Lied. It was first brought to the notice of the modern world in the year 1817, the only original manuscript now known to exist having been discovered about that time in the castle Ambras in the Tyrol, among other manuscripts which had been collected by the Emperor Maximilian I. (1493-1519). The manuscript is now in the Imperial Library at Vienna. It has been several times edited and printed in the original Middle High German, with critical annotations; various translations into modern German have also been published: but so far as I can learn, no complete metrical version in the English language has been made public.</p>
		<p>The name of the author is unknown; it is generally thought to have been constructed, in great measure, from earlier legends which had been repeated by wandering singers. According to the late Karl Bartsch, the distinguished critic and editor of Mediæval German literature, the tale shows affinity to legends of the Scalds of Norway and Denmark, and to those of the Shetland Isles. Traces of resemblance are said to be found among the relics of Anglo-Saxon literature. The supposition that the poem was constructed from various early legends explains some of the marvellous incidents of the tale, and those chronological inconsistencies where the rude habits and ideas of earlier times are combined with the later knightly usages of the Middle Ages and with Christian belief.</p>
		<p>The scene of the poem is laid principally on the shores of the North Sea, and includes Ireland and Normandy, as well as Holland, Denmark, and Friesland. Very vague ideas of geography were, however, entertained by the poet. Some names of places are thought to be fabulous, and critics disagree with regard to the modern countries designated by other names used.</p>
		<p>The poem is founded upon the themes of love and war, and properly consists of three parts. The first portion, embracing four tales, relates the adventures of Hagen, the grandfather of Gu-drun; the second part gives the story of the wooing and abduction of Hilda, his daughter, the mother of Gu-drun. The proper story of Gu-drun begins only with the ninth tale.</p>
		<p>The narrative gives a vivid picture of the ideas, manners, and customs of the age of the author; of the dwellings, dress, and ornaments in use; of the weapons and warfare; of the ships and sea-life; and of the tournaments and court festivities. From it we see the nature of the intellectual amusement enjoyed by the northern nations, at that period of their mental development when literary entertainment in the modern sense was yet unknown, and its place was supplied by listening to the recitals of wandering bards.</p>
		<p>Modern German critics agree in assigning a high literary value to the poem of Gu-drun, and compare it not unfavorably with the Nibelungen Lied. Bartsch, the critic above named, says: “The general impression which the poem gives is one of greater beauty, though not always of equal grandeur with that of the Nibelungen; it is a worthy companion-piece. The two are justly compared, as are the Iliad and the Odyssey. In the Nibelungen as in the Iliad the fate of a whole people is decided by the sword, and the ruling house, consisting of noble heroes, meets destruction before our eyes; but the conquerors do not fully rejoice in their success. The whole breathes a tragic spirit, even more than the Greek epic. ‘<i>Nach Freude Leid</i>’—‘after joy comes sorrow’—is the earnest tone throughout. Gu-drun, like the Odyssey, closes more tenderly and in a spirit of reconciliation. Although pitiless fate has destroyed the happiness of those for whom the poet has awakened our sympathy, and we see a noble being suffer in the most shameful manner, yet we are sustained by hope, and a happy end compensates for woes endured. ‘<i>Aus Leid Freude</i>’—‘sorrows end in joy’—is the final conclusion.... All the characters are worked out in the most minute and careful manner, and are developed consistently.... The best traits of the German nature, fearless bravery, unfaltering fidelity, and unswerving integrity, are presented. The nobility of a feminine soul which, inspired by pure love, in the distress of a hard captivity, preserves its fidelity to its beloved, perhaps in no poem of the German middle ages is so strikingly shown as in the character of Gu-drun.... The descriptions both of battle and scenery are masterly, and are painted with a few decisive strokes.”</p>
		<p>The metrical form of Gu-drun is similar to that of the Nibelungen. In both, the accentuation is determined by the logical sense, as in prose, and not always by the number of syllables, as in most modern verse. In both, the lines are metrically divided, giving three accents to each half-line of the stanza, except in the fourth line, in which Gu-drun differs from the Nibelungen in having five accents instead of four on the concluding half-line.</p>
		<p>The translator has adhered to the original rhythm, and has endeavored in each stanza to convey strictly the ideas of the author, being careful not to introduce anything, in thought or simile, foreign to the poem, and, as far as the verse would permit, to give a verbal rendering.</p>
		<p>The translation has been made from Bartsch’s edition of the original Middle High German (Brockhaus, Leipzig, 1874). He, like the other editors, has supplied some omissions in the manuscript, an instance of which may be seen in the sixth line of the fac-simile given. The drawings introduced are copied from mediæval German printed books.</p>
		<p>I wish to acknowledge my obligation to my brother for careful revision and for many important improvements throughout the translation.</p>
		<p>
			<span class="jr">
				<span class="small">M. P. N.</span>
			</span>
		</p>
		<p>
			<span class="small">
				<span class="sc">Boston, 1889.</span>
			</span>
		</p>
		<h2>Contents.</h2>
		<dl class="toc">
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c1"><span class="sc">Tale I.</span></a> Sigeband, king of Ireland, after the death of his father, marries a princess of Norway, who bears him a son, Hagen. During the celebration of a court festival, Hagen, now seven years old, while outside the castle in the care of his attendants, is caught up by a griffin, and borne to his nest in a distant land.<span class="hst">Stanzas 1-66.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c2"><span class="sc">Tale II.</span></a> Hagen, falling from the grasp of one of the young griffins, crawls into a cave, where he finds three young daughters of kings, who had also been carried off by the griffins. He grows up in their company. At last, one day, he wanders with them to the seashore, where he finds a ship whose master, a lord from Karadie, he persuades to rescue them from their exile.<span class="hst">67-113.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c3"><span class="sc">Tale III.</span></a> The master of the ship inquires of Hagen and the maidens concerning their country, and learns that Hagen is the son of an old enemy. He threatens to keep him as a hostage, but Hagen seizes thirty of the sailors, and flings them into the sea, and compels the others to steer towards his home. There, he sends messengers to announce his arrival to his father and mother, who come down to the shore to meet him.<span class="hst">114-150.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c4"><span class="sc">Tale IV.</span></a> Hagen reconciles his father to the men who had brought him home, and receives from his father the government of the kingdom. He marries one of the three maidens, Hilda, from India. She gives birth to a daughter, likewise named Hilda. When she is grown up, her many suitors are rejected by her father.<span class="hst">151-203.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c5"><span class="sc">Tale V.</span></a> Hettel, king of the Hegelings, a suitor for Hilda, summons his vassals, Wâ-te, Horant, and Fru-te, and sends them to obtain her for his wife. They go, purporting to be merchants, carrying seven hundred warriors concealed in the hold of the ship. They send rich gifts to Hagen, and at the request of his daughter, Hilda, they are kindly received at court.<span class="hst">204-371.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c6"><span class="sc">Tale VI.</span></a> Horant delights the court with his singing, and he with his friend Morunc are introduced to the bower of Hilda. He tells her of Hettel’s suit, which she, charmed by the singing of Horant, receives with favor. They invite her to visit their ship, with her father and mother, and the invitation is accepted.<span class="hst">372-439.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c7"><span class="sc">Tale VII.</span></a> Hilda, with her father and mother and her maidens, rides down to the shore; she and the maidens go on board the ship. While Hagen’s attention is occupied, the vessel sets sail, and they arrive in Hettel’s land.<span class="hst">440-486.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c8"><span class="sc">Tale VIII.</span></a> Hagen and his warriors follow in their ships, in order to rescue Hilda, and reach the Hegeling land: a battle takes place on the seashore. At Hilda’s entreaty, peace is made, and Hagen consents to her marriage with Hettel. Hagen returns home, leaving Hilda and her maidens in Hettel’s kingdom.<span class="hst">487-562.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c9"><span class="sc">Tale IX.</span></a> Wâ-te, Horant, and the other vassals of Hettel go back to their homes. Hilda bears to Hettel a son, Ortwin, and a daughter, Gu-drun, who is afterwards sought by Siegfried, king of Moorland. He is rejected by her father, Hettel, and retires in anger.<span class="hst">563-586.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c10"><span class="sc">Tale X.</span></a> Hartmut, a Norman prince, son of Ludwig and Gerlind, hears of the beauty of Gu-drun, and resolves to woo her. Messengers are dispatched with letters, but receive a forbidding answer.<span class="hst">587-616.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c11"><span class="sc">Tale XI.</span></a> Herwic, king of Sealand, sends suitors for the hand of Gu-drun, who are also rejected. Hartmut of Normandy comes to woo her in person, and is kindly received by her; she, however, begs him, if he values his life, to leave the court. He returns to Normandy, resolved to win her by force.<span class="hst">617-629.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c12"><span class="sc">Tale XII</span>.</a> Herwic, being forbidden by Hettel to woo his daughter, invades his kingdom, and, after a battle, Gu-drun, with Hettel’s consent, is betrothed to him.<span class="hst">630-667.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c13"><span class="sc">Tale XIII.</span></a> Siegfried, a rival suitor for Gu-drun, invades the land of Herwic, who sends to Hettel for his assistance: Hettel with many of his vassals comes to his help. Siegfried is driven into a castle, and there besieged.<span class="hst">668-724.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c14"><span class="sc">Tale XIV.</span></a> Hettel sends to announce to Hilda, his wife, and to Gu-drun, his daughter, his success in the fight with Siegfried. Hartmut, the Norman, takes advantage of the absence of both Hettel and Herwic, and invades the Hegeling kingdom.<span class="hst">725-752.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c15"><span class="sc">Tale XV.</span></a> Hartmut sends messengers again to Gu-drun to ask her hand, and threatens to take her by force if she still rejects his suit. She answers that she is betrothed to Herwic, and refuses him. Hartmut and Ludwig bring an army and capture the Hegeling castle, and carry away Gu-drun with her hand-maidens.<span class="hst">753-809.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c16"><span class="sc">Tale XVI.</span></a> Hettel and Herwic, being informed of their losses by Hilda, make peace with Siegfried, and release him on condition that he will unite with them in war against Hartmut. They take possession of the ships of a pilgrim band, and pursue Hartmut.<span class="hst">810-846.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c17"><span class="sc">Tale XVII.</span></a> Ludwig and Hartmut, on their way to Normandy with Gu-drun, stop at a desert island, called Wulpensand; Hettel and Herwic, in pursuit, reach the island, and a battle ensues.<span class="hst">847-879.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c18"><span class="sc">Tale XVIII.</span></a> Ludwig, king of the Normans, slays Hettel, and his army steals away with the maidens in the night. The Hegelings discover their departure, bury the dead, and erect a hospital and cloister in their memory.<span class="hst">880-918.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c19"><span class="sc">Tale XIX.</span></a> The Hegelings return, and announce to Queen Hilda the death of her husband and their ill-success. They decide to wait till the young knights become old enough for war, and then to make a second campaign against the Normans.<span class="hst">919-950.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c20"><span class="sc">Tale XX.</span></a> The Normans reach their land with Gu-drun and her maidens; she refuses to marry Hartmut, and is placed in the care of Gerlind, his mother, who treats her harshly and obliges her to perform menial service. Ortrun, the sister of Hartmut, shows kindness to Gu-drun.<span class="hst">951-1040.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c21"><span class="sc">Tale XXI.</span></a> Gu-drun receives better treatment, but, still refusing to marry Hartmut, she is sent to wash clothes on the seashore. Hildeburg, one of her maidens, obtains permission to share her labors, which are continued through many years.<span class="hst">1041-1070.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c22"><span class="sc">Tale XXII.</span></a> Hilda summons her vassals to make an expedition against the Normans. After visiting the graves of their kinsmen on the Wulpensand, they pass in safety the magnetic rocks at Givers, and arrive on the coast of Normandy.<span class="hst">1071-1141.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c23"><span class="sc">Tale XXIII.</span></a> Herwic and Ortwin, the brother of Gu-drun, agree to go forward in advance to procure intelligence in regard to her and her maidens.<span class="hst">1142-1164.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c24"><span class="sc">Tale XXIV.</span></a> While Gu-drun and Hildeburg are washing on the seashore, a swan announces to them the approach of Queen Hilda’s army for their rescue, and tells them that two knights will come the next morning to inform them still further of this.<span class="hst">1165-1206.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c25"><span class="sc">Tale XXV.</span></a> Herwic and Ortwin, coming in a boat, see the maidens washing on the shore, recognize them, and make themselves known. Thinking it dishonorable to take the maids away without winning them in fight, the knights return to bring their army. The maidens go back to Gerlind, and, feeling sure of her speedy rescue, Gu-drun pretends to agree to Hartmut’s suit, and is restored to favor.<span class="hst">1207-1334.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c26"><span class="sc">Tale XXVI.</span></a> On their return to their friends, Herwic and Ortwin make known the result of their search. The Hegeling army arrives before the Norman castle, and is discovered by Ludwig and Hartmut.<span class="hst">1335-1365.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c27"><span class="sc">Tale XXVII.</span></a> Hartmut names to Ludwig the banners of the coming knights. On learning that the Hegeling army is approaching, Gerlind counsels her son, Hartmut, to await a siege; but he chooses to sally forth, with Ludwig and their followers, and a battle ensues, in which Ludwig overthrows Herwic.<span class="hst">1366-1440.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c28"><span class="sc">Tale XXVIII.</span></a> Herwic, feeling mortified that Gu-drun from the castle should see his fall, returns to the fight, and slays Ludwig. Gerlind bribes one of her men to put Gu-drun to death, but he is prevented by the threats of Hartmut. Hartmut is taken prisoner, and carried on board a ship.<span class="hst">1441-1493.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c29"><span class="sc">Tale XXIX.</span></a> The Hegelings obtain possession of the castle, and spare neither old nor young. Ortrun seeks refuge with Gu-drun, and Gerlind also implores her protection, but she is recognized and killed by Wâ-te. The Hegeling army devastate the land: Hartmut and Ortrun are held captive.<span class="hst">1494-1560.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c30"><span class="sc">Tale XXX.</span></a> The Hegeling army returns home, bringing Gu-drun and her maidens, with the Norman captives. Hilda welcomes the returning ships, and embraces her daughter, whom she does not at first recognize, after her long absence. By Gu-drun’s request, Hilda is reconciled to Hartmut and Ortrun, and Ortwin takes Ortrun for his bride. Hartmut and his men are set free, on their promise not to escape, and Hartmut agrees to wed Hildeburg. Herwic’s sister is sent for, and betrothed to Siegfried. <span class="hst">1561-1666.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c31"><span class="sc">Tale XXXI.</span></a> A great wedding festival is held, at which the four kings, Herwic, Ortwin, Hartmut, and Siegfried, try to surpass each other in generous giving. Hartmut with his bride, Hildeburg, leaves for Normandy.<span class="hst">1667-1695.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><a class="pginternal" href="#c32"><span class="sc">Tale XXXII.</span></a> Siegfried, king of Moorland, goes home, taking his bride, Herwic’s sister. Herwic returns to his home with Gu-drun, after she has bidden farewell to her mother, Hilda, and to her brother, Ortwin, and Ortrun, his wife.<span class="hst">1696-1705.</span></dt>
			<dd/>
		</dl>
		<h2>Names of Persons.</h2>
		<dl class="default">
			<dt><span class="sc">Ger</span>,—an early king of Ireland, grandfather of Hagen.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">U-te</span>,—wife of Ger.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Sigeband</span>,—son of Ger and U-te.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">U-te</span>,—a Norwegian princess, wife of Sigeband.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hagen</span>,—son of Sigeband and the second U-te, and grandfather of Gu-drun.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hilda</span>,—a princess of India, wife of Hagen.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hilda</span>,—daughter of Hagen, wife of Hettel.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hettel</span>,—king of the Hegelings, husband of Hilda, and father of Gu-drun and Ortwin.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Gu-drun</span>,—daughter of Hettel and Hilda.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Ortwin</span>,—prince of Ortland, son of Hettel and Hilda.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Wâ-te</span>,</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Fru-te</span>,</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Horant</span>,</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Morunc</span>,</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Irold</span>, } vassals of Hettel.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Ludwig</span>,—king of Normandy.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Gerlind</span>,—wife of Ludwig.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hartmut</span>,—son of Ludwig and Gerlind, a suitor for Gu-drun.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Ortrun</span>,—daughter of Ludwig and Gerlind.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Siegfried</span>,—king of Moorland, a suitor for Gu-drun.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Herwic</span>,—king of Sealand, betrothed to Gu-drun.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hildeburg</span>,</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hergart</span>, } maiden companions of Gu-drun.</dt>
			<dd/>
		</dl>
		<h2>Names of Places.</h2>
		<dl class="default">
			<dt><span class="sc">Abakie</span>,—an imaginary Eastern land, subject to Siegfried.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Abalie</span>,—an Eastern land, noted for gems and cloths.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Alzabie</span>,—a fabulous Moorland city, the residence of Siegfried.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Amile</span>,—an imaginary Eastern land, the home of mermaids.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Araby</span>,—a land whence came fine clothes and treasures.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Ballian</span>,—Ballyghan, Hagen’s chief city in Ireland.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Daneland</span>,—not the present Denmark, but, in the ninth century, the seat of the Danes in Friesland, near the mouth of the Scheldt.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Dietmarsch</span>,—a province subject to Hettel.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Friesland</span>,—subject to Hettel, and held in fief by Morunc and Irold.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Galeis</span>,—a land whose people are friendly to Herwic.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Galicia</span>,—Portugal, the home of Hildeburg.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Garadie</span>,—an indeterminate country, near Ireland.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Givers</span>,—a fabulous land, subject to Horant.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Gulstred</span>,—a place in the West.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Hegeling</span>,—the name of a people on the North Sea, in Holland, governed by Hettel.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Holstein</span>,—variously mentioned as subject to Fru-te, to Irolt, and to Ortwin.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Icaria</span>,—a fabulous land whose people are allies of Siegfried of Moorland.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Ireland</span>,—The situation seems sometimes to correspond with the modern Ireland, and sometimes to a part of Holland. There is a place in Texel, at the present day, named Eijerland.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Iserland</span>,—the home of one of Gu-drun’s maiden companions.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Kampalia</span>,—a fabulous land noted for rich clothing.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Kampatille</span>,—Hettel’s castle, also called Matelan.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Karadie</span>,—a land belonging to Siegfried of Moorland.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Kassian</span>,—the chief city and castle of Normandy.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Matelan</span>,—see Kampatille.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Moorland</span>,—the kingdom of Siegfried; owing to the love of the marvelous in antiquity, regarded by the poet as the land of the Moors, but probably a low country near the North Sea.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Nifland</span>,—“the land of fogs,” on the lower Rhine, the home of the Nibelungen,</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Normandy</span> or <span class="sc">Ormanie</span>,—may be the country now known as Normandy, or is perhaps a region near the mouth of the Scheldt, where the name Ormans-kapelle occurs in an ancient map.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Ortland</span>,—probably Jutland, under the rule of Ortwin.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Salme</span>,—a fabulous country.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Sealand</span>,—Herwic’s kingdom, not the Danish Zealand, but probably the sea-lands of Friesland.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Scotland</span>,—spoken of as belonging to Norway.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Sturmland</span>,—subject to Wâ-te, adjoining Herwic’s kingdom.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Waleis</span>,—the western limit of Hettel’s kingdom, by some supposed to be Wales, but generally thought to be the country near the mouth of the river Waal in Holland.</dt>
			<dd/>
			<dt><span class="sc">Wulpensand</span>,—an island at the mouth of the Scheldt.</dt>
			<dd/>
		</dl>
		<h2 id="c1">Tale the First.<br/><span class="small">HOW HAGEN WAS CARRIED OFF BY THE GRIFFIN.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In olden days in Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>a king to greatness came</p>
			<p class="t0">Who bore the name of Sigeband;<span class="hst">  </span>Ger was his father’s name.</p>
			<p class="t0">Queen U-te was his mother;<span class="hst">  </span>she of a king was daughter;</p>
			<p class="t0">High was her worth and goodness,<span class="hst">  </span>and well her love beseemed the lord who sought her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The sway of Ger was mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>as unto all is known;</p>
			<p class="t0">He many lands and castles<span class="hst">  </span>and lordships seven did own:</p>
			<p class="t0">Four thousand knights or over<span class="hst">  </span>he thence was often leading,</p>
			<p class="t0">And wealth, and name yet greater,<span class="hst">  </span>he daily won, with those who did his bidding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the youthful Sigeband<span class="hst">  </span>to his father’s court must go,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he might there be learning<span class="hst">  </span>all he had need to know,—</p>
			<p class="t0">To bear the spear in riding,<span class="hst">  </span>to thrust it, and to shield him,</p>
			<p class="t0">That when he met the foeman,<span class="hst">  </span>the better fame thereby the fight would yield him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">That age he now was reaching<span class="hst">  </span>when he the sword might bear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all that a knight befitteth<span class="hst">  </span>he learned a goodly share.</p>
			<p class="t0">This from kin and vassals<span class="hst">  </span>praise unmeasured brought him;</p>
			<p class="t0">For this he still was striving,<span class="hst">  </span>and of the toil it cost he ne’er bethought him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A few short days thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>death came among them all,</p>
			<p class="t0">As even to men the greatest<span class="hst">  </span>sadly doth befall.</p>
			<p class="t0">In every land and kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>the truth of this we’re meeting,</p>
			<p class="t0">And we, with heavy sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>such news ourselves must every day be waiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Sigeband’s mother, U-te,<span class="hst">  </span>the widow’s seat must take;</p>
			<p class="t0">Her son, so high and worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>left all things for her sake.</p>
			<p class="t0">No whit he cared for wedlock,<span class="hst">  </span>and had no heart for wooing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a queenly lady<span class="hst">  </span>at this was sad, young Sigeband’s sorrow ruing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A worthy wife to find him<span class="hst">  </span>his mother him besought;</p>
			<p class="t0">So might he and his kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>to greater name be brought;</p>
			<p class="t0">And he with all his kindred,<span class="hst">  </span>after their bitter sorrow</p>
			<p class="t0">For the death of the king, his father,<span class="hst">  </span>might for themselves no little gladness borrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The teaching of his mother<span class="hst">  </span>he heard in kindly mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">And began at once to follow,<span class="hst">  </span>as that of a friend one should.</p>
			<p class="t0">The best of high-born maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>’mong those in Norway dwelling,</p>
			<p class="t0">He bade his men to sue for:<span class="hst">  </span>to help in this he found his kinsmen willing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She soon to him was wedded,<span class="hst">  </span>as hath of old been said.</p>
			<p class="t0">With her, among her followers,<span class="hst">  </span>came many a lovely maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, from over Scotland’s border,<span class="hst">  </span>seven hundred warriors fully;</p>
			<p class="t0">They came with her right gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>when the worth of the king was known to them more truly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Proudly their way they wended,<span class="hst">  </span>as beseemed the maiden’s birth;</p>
			<p class="t0">With all the care they led her<span class="hst">  </span>befitting his kingly worth;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hidden were the roadways<span class="hst">  </span>by gazers without number,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who hasted to behold her;<span class="hst">  </span>for three miles and a half the throngs the ways did cumber.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Where’er along the roadside<span class="hst">  </span>the path with green was spread,</p>
			<p class="t0">Flowers and grass were trampled,<span class="hst">  </span>by crowds, with heavy tread.</p>
			<p class="t0">It fell upon that season<span class="hst">  </span>when the leaves are springing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And in every copse and thicket<span class="hst">  </span>all the birds their best of songs are singing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of simple folk and merry<span class="hst">  </span>there rode with her enough;</p>
			<p class="t0">While many loaded horses<span class="hst">  </span>bore much costly stuff,</p>
			<p class="t0">Brought there from her birthland<span class="hst">  </span>by followers of the maiden;</p>
			<p class="t0">They came with her by thousands,<span class="hst">  </span>with gold as well as clothing heavy-laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On the shore of two wide marches,<span class="hst">  </span>the dwellers by the sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">As they saw the west wind waft her,<span class="hst">  </span>gave her welcome free;</p>
			<p class="t0">They found a seemly lodging<span class="hst">  </span>for the lovely, well-born lady,</p>
			<p class="t0">And brought her all things needful,<span class="hst">  </span>by the youthful king, before, for her made ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The fair young maid they welcomed<span class="hst">  </span>with knightly tournament;</p>
			<p class="t0">Not soon their games they ended,<span class="hst">  </span>when on the spear-fight bent.</p>
			<p class="t0">To the land of Ger his father<span class="hst">  </span>they bore her to be wedded;</p>
			<p class="t0">She there was loved and mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>and men to sound her name she never needed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All, as they were able,<span class="hst">  </span>waited on the maid;</p>
			<p class="t0">The gaudy cloth for her saddle<span class="hst">  </span>down to the grass was spread;</p>
			<p class="t0">The horses’ hoofs were hidden<span class="hst">  </span>by the housing, heavy drooping.</p>
			<p class="t0">Aha! In mood how gleeful<span class="hst">  </span>was Ireland’s lord, once more a blessing hoping!</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the time was fitting<span class="hst">  </span>that he the maid should kiss,</p>
			<p class="t0">All crowded thick about him,<span class="hst">  </span>in haste to see their bliss.</p>
			<p class="t0">The bosses of their bucklers<span class="hst">  </span>were now heard loudly clashing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Struck with blows together;<span class="hst">  </span>each strove to shun the throngs, in uproar crashing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now with the dawn of morning,<span class="hst">  </span>they sent out, far and wide,</p>
			<p class="t0">To give to all the tidings<span class="hst">  </span>of the coming of the bride,</p>
			<p class="t0">And that, with their master,<span class="hst">  </span>they erelong would crown her.</p>
			<p class="t0">His queen she was thereafter,<span class="hst">  </span>and well she earned from him the honor shown her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">It was not deemed becoming<span class="hst">  </span>that he his love should plight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Since she by birth was queenly,<span class="hst">  </span>and he not yet a knight:</p>
			<p class="t0">He first, before his lieges,<span class="hst">  </span>must the crown be wearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">To this his kinsmen helped him,<span class="hst">  </span>and later of his worth were all men hearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He, with knights five hundred,<span class="hst">  </span>then was dubbed with the sword;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever they could wish for<span class="hst">  </span>was given them at his word,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Both shields, and, for their wearing,<span class="hst">  </span>every kind of clothing.</p>
			<p class="t0">The youthful king so dauntless,<span class="hst">  </span>thro’ life, of fame and honor wanted nothing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For many a day thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>his sway did Ireland bless,</p>
			<p class="t0">And never did his greatness<span class="hst">  </span>at any time grow less.</p>
			<p class="t0">To all he freely listened;<span class="hst">  </span>the poor man’s wrongs he righted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Widely known was his goodness;<span class="hst">  </span>no truer knight than he his word e’er plighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His boundless acres yielded<span class="hst">  </span>a full and ready gain;</p>
			<p class="t0">His wife was known for wisdom,<span class="hst">  </span>and worthy to be his queen.</p>
			<p class="t0">To hold her as their mistress<span class="hst">  </span>full thirty lords it booted;</p>
			<p class="t0">As long as the sway she wielded,<span class="hst">  </span>her hand to each his lands and home allotted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She bore unto her husband,<span class="hst">  </span>within the next three years,</p>
			<p class="t0">A child to see most comely;<span class="hst">  </span>(such is the tale one hears.)</p>
			<p class="t0">When later he was christened,<span class="hst">  </span>and they were told to name him,</p>
			<p class="t0">They gave the name of Hagen;<span class="hst">  </span>and never since, the tale of his life doth shame him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He had most careful breeding,<span class="hst">  </span>and kindly was he nursed;</p>
			<p class="t0">Should he be like his fathers,<span class="hst">  </span>he would of knights be first.</p>
			<p class="t0">Watched over by wise women,<span class="hst">  </span>and by maidens of early age,</p>
			<p class="t0">His father and fond mother<span class="hst">  </span>found in his face their glad eyes’ pasturage.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the boy, well fostered,<span class="hst">  </span>to his seventh year was bred,</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas seen that he by warriors<span class="hst">  </span>by the hand was often led.</p>
			<p class="t0">He was happy in men’s teaching,<span class="hst">  </span>but was with women wearied;</p>
			<p class="t0">All this he knew no longer;<span class="hst">  </span>for, torn from them, he far away was carried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whene’er to him it happened<span class="hst">  </span>weapons at court to see,</p>
			<p class="t0">He understood them readily,<span class="hst">  </span>and their wearer longed to be;</p>
			<p class="t0">The helmet and ringed armor<span class="hst">  </span>would he have put on gladly:</p>
			<p class="t0">Alas! not long he saw them,<span class="hst">  </span>and all his hopes of fighting ended sadly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While the kingly Sigeband,<span class="hst">  </span>beneath a cedar-tree,</p>
			<p class="t0">One day on the turf was seated,<span class="hst">  </span>the queen said earnestly:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Although good name and riches<span class="hst">  </span>we share with one another,</p>
			<p class="t0">At one thing yet I wonder,<span class="hst">  </span>and this from you I dare to hide no further.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He asked of her: “What is it?”<span class="hst">  </span>Then said his helpmeet kind:</p>
			<p class="t0">“It me doth sorely worry<span class="hst">  </span>in body and in mind,</p>
			<p class="t0">And my heart, alas! is heavy;<span class="hst">  </span>to my wish you give no heeding,</p>
			<p class="t0">To see you ’midst your vassals,<span class="hst">  </span>my beaming eyes with pride upon you feeding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king to her thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“How should it ever be</p>
			<p class="t0">That you have had such longing<span class="hst">  </span>me with my knights to see?</p>
			<p class="t0">I will strive thy will to follow,<span class="hst">  </span>of this think not so sadly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever to meet thy wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>both care and toil will I give myself most gladly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “No man is living<span class="hst">  </span>who owns such wealth, I trow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who has so many castles<span class="hst">  </span>or lands so wide as thou,</p>
			<p class="t0">With silver and gems so costly,<span class="hst">  </span>and gold so heavy weighing;</p>
			<p class="t0">For this are our ways too lowly,<span class="hst">  </span>and nought there is in life to me worth saying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“When erst I was a maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>and on Scotland’s soil drew breath,</p>
			<p class="t0">(Chide not, my lord, thy helpmeet,<span class="hst">  </span>but list to what she saith,)</p>
			<p class="t0">I there was daily seeing<span class="hst">  </span>the liegemen of my father</p>
			<p class="t0">For highest prizes striving;<span class="hst">  </span>but here such games we never see together.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“A king so rich and mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>as you in name have been,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before his followers often<span class="hst">  </span>should let himself be seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">He oft should ride in tilting<span class="hst">  </span>with other champions knightly,</p>
			<p class="t0">That both himself and his kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>should seem more fair, and hold their rank more fitly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“It shows, in a lord so noble,<span class="hst">  </span>a most unworthy mind,</p>
			<p class="t0">When he has heaped together<span class="hst">  </span>riches of every kind,</p>
			<p class="t0">If he with his faithful warriors<span class="hst">  </span>to share them is unwilling:</p>
			<p class="t0">When men in the storm of warfare<span class="hst">  </span>deep wounds have had, how else can they find healing?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to her King Sigeband:<span class="hst">  </span>“Lady, you mock at me;</p>
			<p class="t0">In all these warlike pastimes<span class="hst">  </span>I will most earnest be;</p>
			<p class="t0">And for the strife so worthy<span class="hst">  </span>my wish shall never waver:</p>
			<p class="t0">No man shall find it easy<span class="hst">  </span>the ways of well-born kings to teach me ever.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “You now for warriors<span class="hst">  </span>must send throughout the land;</p>
			<p class="t0">Stores of wealth and clothing<span class="hst">  </span>must be given with open hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">I too will send out heralds<span class="hst">  </span>my kinsmen all to rally,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to show them my good wishes;<span class="hst">  </span>we then shall find our life to pass more gaily.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At this the king of Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>unto his wife thus said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I yield to you most willingly,<span class="hst">  </span>for men are often led</p>
			<p class="t0">By the wishes of fair women<span class="hst">  </span>great feastings to make ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">I therefore now will gather<span class="hst">  </span>my brave and hardy kinsmen, and those too of my lady.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him the queen then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Sorrow no more I wear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Five hundred women’s garments<span class="hst">  </span>I will give, to each her share;</p>
			<p class="t0">To four and sixty maidens<span class="hst">  </span>gay clothes to give I’m willing.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the king did tell her<span class="hst">  </span>high times he soon would hold, his word fulfilling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The sports were then bespoken:<span class="hst">  </span>he bade his men to send,</p>
			<p class="t0">In eighteen days or sooner,<span class="hst">  </span>to liegeman and to friend,</p>
			<p class="t0">To say to all in Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>who would in his games be riding,</p>
			<p class="t0">That, after summer was ended,<span class="hst">  </span>they should spend the winter, with him abiding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He bade his men make benches,<span class="hst">  </span>so our tale doth run,</p>
			<p class="t0">And for these, from out the wilderness,<span class="hst">  </span>timber must be drawn;</p>
			<p class="t0">For sixty thousand warriors<span class="hst">  </span>seats must they make ready.</p>
			<p class="t0">His henchmen and deft stewards,<span class="hst">  </span>to do this work for the king, were skilled and speedy.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thither men then hastened<span class="hst">  </span>on many a winding way;</p>
			<p class="t0">All were kindly cared for<span class="hst">  </span>throughout their lengthened stay.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now from Ireland’s kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>as the king had bidden,</p>
			<p class="t0">Full six and eighty thousand<span class="hst">  </span>of warriors strong there to his court had ridden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">From the store-rooms of the castle<span class="hst">  </span>clothing now was borne,—</p>
			<p class="t0">All the gear they wished for,<span class="hst">  </span>and all that could be worn.</p>
			<p class="t0">Shields were also given,<span class="hst">  </span>and steeds of Irish breeding;</p>
			<p class="t0">The proud and queenly lady<span class="hst">  </span>bedecked her guests with all they could be needing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She gave to a thousand women<span class="hst">  </span>costly clothes enow,</p>
			<p class="t0">And likewise to fair maidens<span class="hst">  </span>what one to youth should allow,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Broidered bands and jewels,<span class="hst">  </span>and silk that glistened brightly;</p>
			<p class="t0">The many lovely ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>together standing there, were fair and sightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To every one who wished it<span class="hst">  </span>were given clothes well-made.</p>
			<p class="t0">Horses were there seen prancing,<span class="hst">  </span>by the hand of foot-boys led;</p>
			<p class="t0">These light shields did carry,<span class="hst">  </span>and their spears were seizing.</p>
			<p class="t0">U-te, the queenly mother,<span class="hst">  </span>was gladly seen, as she on the leads sat gazing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The guests by the king were bidden<span class="hst">  </span>freely in tilts to meet;</p>
			<p class="t0">The glitter of their helmets<span class="hst">  </span>grew dim in the dust and heat.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ladies, held in honor,<span class="hst">  </span>near by were also seated,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where they the deeds of the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>saw full well, and with words of wonder greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As oft before has happened,<span class="hst">  </span>the show had lasted long;</p>
			<p class="t0">The king was not unwilling<span class="hst">  </span>to be looked on by the throng.</p>
			<p class="t0">This, meanwhile, to his lady<span class="hst">  </span>happiness was giving,</p>
			<p class="t0">As she, amidst her women,<span class="hst">  </span>sat on the roof, and saw their earnest striving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now her lord had ridden,<span class="hst">  </span>as doth beseem a king,</p>
			<p class="t0">He thought to end their onsets;<span class="hst">  </span>some rest to them to bring</p>
			<p class="t0">He deemed not unbecoming;<span class="hst">  </span>to stop the games he bade them.</p>
			<p class="t0">And then before the ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>after their skill thus shown, he proudly led them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">U-te, the high-born lady,<span class="hst">  </span>began her friends to greet,</p>
			<p class="t0">With those from far-off kingdoms;<span class="hst">  </span>them as guests to meet</p>
			<p class="t0">The queen was truly willing;<span class="hst">  </span>on them her glad eyes rested.</p>
			<p class="t0">The gifts of Lady U-te<span class="hst">  </span>were not on scornful friends that evening wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Knights and lovely ladies<span class="hst">  </span>together there were seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">The good-will of the master<span class="hst">  </span>to all well-known had been;</p>
			<p class="t0">In all their games and tilting,<span class="hst">  </span>his kindness was not hidden.</p>
			<p class="t0">Once more the guests, that evening,<span class="hst">  </span>to ride in warlike strife by him were bidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Their games and sports had lasted<span class="hst">  </span>until nine days were gone;</p>
			<p class="t0">They, as knights befitteth,<span class="hst">  </span>their skill to the king had shown.</p>
			<p class="t0">By the many wandering players<span class="hst">  </span>the show was liked the better,</p>
			<p class="t0">And they plied their work more briskly,<span class="hst">  </span>and hoped that their reward would be the greater.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Sackbuts loud and trumpets<span class="hst">  </span>there might all men hear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Fluting too and harping<span class="hst">  </span>fell upon the ear.</p>
			<p class="t0">Some on the rote were playing,<span class="hst">  </span>others in song were vying;</p>
			<p class="t0">They, by their jigs and fifing,<span class="hst">  </span>soon would better clothes for themselves be buying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On the tenth morn it happened,<span class="hst">  </span>(now hark to my sorry tale,)</p>
			<p class="t0">That, after all their pastimes,<span class="hst">  </span>there rose a bitter wail.</p>
			<p class="t0">About these days so merry<span class="hst">  </span>new tales were told on the morrow;</p>
			<p class="t0">And tho’ they now were mirthful,<span class="hst">  </span>they came to know deep gloom and heavy sorrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the guests were seated<span class="hst">  </span>beside their kingly host,</p>
			<p class="t0">There came to them a player,<span class="hst">  </span>and proudly made his boast</p>
			<p class="t0">That he, before all others,<span class="hst">  </span>(who should indeed believe him?)</p>
			<p class="t0">Was far more skilled in playing,<span class="hst">  </span>and even the greatest lords their ear must give him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Outside, a lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>was leading by the hand</p>
			<p class="t0">The little son of Sigeband<span class="hst">  </span>who swayed the Irish land;</p>
			<p class="t0">With him were likewise women<span class="hst">  </span>who to the boy gave heeding,</p>
			<p class="t0">And friendly kinsmen also,<span class="hst">  </span>who carefully taught the child, and oversaw his breeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Within the great king’s palace<span class="hst">  </span>was heard a din and shout;</p>
			<p class="t0">All were there heard laughing,<span class="hst">  </span>the roomy walls throughout.</p>
			<p class="t0">The guardians of young Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>crowded up too nearly,</p>
			<p class="t0">And thus lost sight of the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>together with the child they loved so dearly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The evil luck of their master<span class="hst">  </span>to him that day drew near,</p>
			<p class="t0">And brought to him and U-te<span class="hst">  </span>sudden woe and fear.</p>
			<p class="t0">Sent by the wicked devil,<span class="hst">  </span>from afar his herald hasted</p>
			<p class="t0">To them in their happy kingdom;<span class="hst">  </span>they were by this with sorrow sorely wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">It was a strong, wild griffin<span class="hst">  </span>had quickly thither flown;</p>
			<p class="t0">From the little boy of Sigeband,<span class="hst">  </span>who ever care had known,</p>
			<p class="t0">Came ill luck to his father,<span class="hst">  </span>who soon of this was tasting.</p>
			<p class="t0">His son, so well-belovéd,<span class="hst">  </span>to him was lost, with the mighty bird far hasting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A shadow now came o’er them,<span class="hst">  </span>from wings that bore him fleet,</p>
			<p class="t0">As if a cloud had risen;<span class="hst">  </span>great strength had the bird, I weet.</p>
			<p class="t0">The guests, in pastime busy,<span class="hst">  </span>no thought to this had given,</p>
			<p class="t0">And the maid, with the child she was leading,<span class="hst">  </span>was standing now alone, unheeded even.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Beneath the weight of the griffin<span class="hst">  </span>forest trees broke down;</p>
			<p class="t0">And now the trusty maiden<span class="hst">  </span>looked where the bird had flown;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then she herself sought shelter,<span class="hst">  </span>and left the child forsaken.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hearing a tale so startling,<span class="hst">  </span>one truly might the whole for a wonder reckon.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The griffin soon alighted,<span class="hst">  </span>and in his claws he held</p>
			<p class="t0">The little child, gripped tightly,<span class="hst">  </span>while with fear it quailed.</p>
			<p class="t0">His ghastly mood and anger<span class="hst">  </span>the bird was harshly showing;</p>
			<p class="t0">This must knights and kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>long bewail, with sorrow ever growing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The boy was sorely frightened,<span class="hst">  </span>and began aloud to shriek;</p>
			<p class="t0">Higher the mighty griffin<span class="hst">  </span>flew, with outstretched beak;</p>
			<p class="t0">To the clouds above them floating<span class="hst">  </span>he his prey was bearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Sigeband, lord of Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>loudly wept, his outcries never sparing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His friends and all his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>the sorry tale soon heard;</p>
			<p class="t0">They, in the death of his offspring,<span class="hst">  </span>his bitter sorrow shared.</p>
			<p class="t0">Downcast were he and his lady,<span class="hst">  </span>and all their loss felt nearly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Sorely they wept together,<span class="hst">  </span>mourning the boy, now torn from them so early.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In this their mood so gloomy,<span class="hst">  </span>the happy, merry plays</p>
			<p class="t0">Must now be sadly ended.<span class="hst">  </span>Before their frightened gaze,</p>
			<p class="t0">The griffin so had robbed them<span class="hst">  </span>that all for home now started,</p>
			<p class="t0">Sober, and filled with sadness.<span class="hst">  </span>They truly felt forlorn, and heavy-hearted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king was bitterly weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>his breast with tears was wet;</p>
			<p class="t0">The high-born queen besought him<span class="hst">  </span>his sorrows to forget,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus wisely to him speaking:<span class="hst">  </span>“Should all in death be stricken,</p>
			<p class="t0">There must be an end of all things;<span class="hst">  </span>it is the will of God their lives hath taken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now all would hence be faring,<span class="hst">  </span>but the queen to them did say:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I beg you, knights and warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>longer with us to stay;</p>
			<p class="t0">Our gifts of gold and silver,<span class="hst">  </span>that here for you are ready,</p>
			<p class="t0">You should not think of meanly;<span class="hst">  </span>our love for you is ever true and steady.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The knights to her bowed lowly,<span class="hst">  </span>and then began they all</p>
			<p class="t0">To say how they were thankful.<span class="hst">  </span>The king, thereon, did call</p>
			<p class="t0">For silken stuffs, the richest,<span class="hst">  </span>for all who there yet tarried;</p>
			<p class="t0">They had ne’er been cut nor opened;<span class="hst">  </span>and from far-off lands had erst to the king been carried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He gave them also horses,<span class="hst">  </span>both palfreys and war-steeds;</p>
			<p class="t0">The horses out of Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>were tall and of hardy breeds.</p>
			<p class="t0">Red gold was likewise given,<span class="hst">  </span>and silver without weighing;</p>
			<p class="t0">The king with care had bidden<span class="hst">  </span>outfit good for his guests, no longer staying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as the queen was willing,<span class="hst">  </span>each her leave now takes,</p>
			<p class="t0">Both lovely maids and women;<span class="hst">  </span>each one herself bedecks</p>
			<p class="t0">With gifts that made her fairer;<span class="hst">  </span>all new clothes are wearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">The high times now are ended;<span class="hst">  </span>Sigeband’s land they leave, and are homeward faring.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c2">Tale the Second.<br/><span class="small">HOW HAGEN SLEW THE GRIFFIN.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of how their stay was ended<span class="hst">  </span>I will speak no longer here;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now I tell you further<span class="hst">  </span>of the rushing flight in the air,</p>
			<p class="t0">That the child with the angry griffin<span class="hst">  </span>far away was bearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">For this his friends and kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>long in their hearts were heavy sorrow wearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Because the Lord so willed it<span class="hst">  </span>the child was not yet dead;</p>
			<p class="t0">But, none the less, he later<span class="hst">  </span>a life of sadness led,</p>
			<p class="t0">After the harsh old griffin<span class="hst">  </span>back to his nestlings bore him.</p>
			<p class="t0">When on their prey they gloated,<span class="hst">  </span>hard toil enough the boy had now before him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as the bird that bore him<span class="hst">  </span>did on his nest alight,</p>
			<p class="t0">He dropped the boy he carried,<span class="hst">  </span>and in his claws held tight;</p>
			<p class="t0">One of the young ones caught him:<span class="hst">  </span>that he did not devour him</p>
			<p class="t0">Thanks to God thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>were given, far and wide, for the watch kept o’er him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Else the birds had slain him,<span class="hst">  </span>and with their claws had torn.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now listen all with wonder,<span class="hst">  </span>and his bitter sorrow learn:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hear how the king of Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>then from death was shielded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Him a young bird now carried,<span class="hst">  </span>strongly clutched, and naught of his grip he yielded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">From tree to tree in the forest<span class="hst">  </span>he with the boy took flight;</p>
			<p class="t0">The bird a little too boldly<span class="hst">  </span>trusted his strength and might.</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon a branch he lighted,<span class="hst">  </span>but now to the ground must flutter,</p>
			<p class="t0">For he was much too heavy;<span class="hst">  </span>in the nest to have longer staid had methinks been better.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The child, while the bird was falling,<span class="hst">  </span>broke from him away,</p>
			<p class="t0">And hid among the bushes,<span class="hst">  </span>a little, lorn estray;</p>
			<p class="t0">Well-nigh was he to starving,<span class="hst">  </span>’twas long since food he tasted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet on a day long after<span class="hst">  </span>the hopes of women in Ireland on him rested.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">God doth many a wonder,<span class="hst">  </span>truly one may say.</p>
			<p class="t0">By the craft of the mighty griffin,<span class="hst">  </span>it came to pass one day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Three daughters fair of princes<span class="hst">  </span>had been taken thither,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now near by were dwelling.<span class="hst">  </span>No man can tell how there they lived together,</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">And how, thro’ days so many,<span class="hst">  </span>their lives to them were spared,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were it not that God in heaven<span class="hst">  </span>for them in kindness cared.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen now no longer<span class="hst">  </span>need live without a fellow;</p>
			<p class="t0">Those good and lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>soon found the little waif in a rocky hollow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When, crawling to his hiding,<span class="hst">  </span>they the child did see,</p>
			<p class="t0">It might, so thought the maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>a dwarfish goblin be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or perhaps it was a water-oaf,<span class="hst">  </span>from out the sea up-driven;</p>
			<p class="t0">But when the boy came near them,<span class="hst">  </span>at once a welcome kind to him was given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen was ware of the maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>as into their cave they stole,</p>
			<p class="t0">While with fear and sadness<span class="hst">  </span>their little hearts were full,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before they yet had knowledge<span class="hst">  </span>that they a Christian greeted.</p>
			<p class="t0">But the care they later showed him<span class="hst">  </span>lifted the pain from many hearts o’erweighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First spake the eldest maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“How darest thou in our cave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where from the God of heaven<span class="hst">  </span>we home and shelter have?</p>
			<p class="t0">Go, seek again thy playmates,<span class="hst">  </span>the billowy waters under;</p>
			<p class="t0">Enough ourselves we sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>and on our bitter lot in sadness ponder.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high-born child then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“I pray you let me stay;</p>
			<p class="t0">I truly am a Christian,<span class="hst">  </span>you must not say me nay.</p>
			<p class="t0">One of the griffins seized me,<span class="hst">  </span>and to the cave did carry;</p>
			<p class="t0">I cannot live all lonely,<span class="hst">  </span>and here with you would I most gladly tarry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the child so friendless<span class="hst">  </span>they loving welcome gave;</p>
			<p class="t0">But they of his worth thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>did better knowledge have.</p>
			<p class="t0">They now could ask him only,<span class="hst">  </span>whence he had been stolen;</p>
			<p class="t0">But, such was then his hunger,<span class="hst">  </span>in telling his tale, his heart was full and swollen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the little foundling:<span class="hst">  </span>“Food I sorely need;</p>
			<p class="t0">Give to me, in kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>a little drink and bread.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Tis long since I have had it,<span class="hst">  </span>and now three days I’m fasting,</p>
			<p class="t0">The while the griffin bore me,<span class="hst">  </span>and full a hundred miles was hither hasting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered one of the maidens:<span class="hst">  </span>“Our lot it so hath been,</p>
			<p class="t0">That we our wonted cup-bearers<span class="hst">  </span>never here have seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Neither our lordly steward,<span class="hst">  </span>who should food to us be giving.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Still they praised God’s goodness;<span class="hst">  </span>altho’ their years were few, they were wisely living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A search they soon were making<span class="hst">  </span>for roots and herbage wild,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wherewith they hoped to strengthen<span class="hst">  </span>Sigeband’s darling child.</p>
			<p class="t0">Such food as they had lived on<span class="hst">  </span>they gave to him most freely;</p>
			<p class="t0">To him ’twas a meal unwonted,<span class="hst">  </span>but such as they long time had eaten daily.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Yet he needs must eat it,<span class="hst">  </span>for hunger sore he hath,</p>
			<p class="t0">And hard it is to any<span class="hst">  </span>to meet with bitter death.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thro’ all the days so dreary,<span class="hst">  </span>while with the maidens dwelling,</p>
			<p class="t0">To them his help most willing<span class="hst">  </span>he ever gave, his thankfulness thus telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They, too, had him in keeping,<span class="hst">  </span>that can I say for truth;</p>
			<p class="t0">He there grew up in sadness,<span class="hst">  </span>throughout his early youth;</p>
			<p class="t0">Until, one day, the children,<span class="hst">  </span>to make them greatly sorrow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before their cavern-dwelling<span class="hst">  </span>saw wonders rise, that threatened more to-morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">I know not from what border,<span class="hst">  </span>tossing o’er sea to land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Came to those shores so rocky<span class="hst">  </span>a holy pilgrim band.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ground-swell it was heavy,<span class="hst">  </span>and rocked the bark full sorely;</p>
			<p class="t0">Thereat the banished maidens<span class="hst">  </span>felt their care and sorrow growing hourly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon the ship was shattered;<span class="hst">  </span>not one his life could save.</p>
			<p class="t0">Quickly the stern old griffins<span class="hst">  </span>came down beside the wave;</p>
			<p class="t0">Seizing many drowned ones,<span class="hst">  </span>back to their nest they hurried.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a woman was mourning,<span class="hst">  </span>soon as the sorry tale to her was carried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When to the hungry nestlings<span class="hst">  </span>the food they took in haste,</p>
			<p class="t0">Back again the griffins<span class="hst">  </span>came from their offspring’s nest;</p>
			<p class="t0">From what far spot I know not,<span class="hst">  </span>along the sea-paths flying.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their young they left on the hillside,<span class="hst">  </span>with a neighbor grim, while they were hither hieing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One day the goods of the sailors<span class="hst">  </span>Hagen saw near the sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">For many had been drowned there;<span class="hst">  </span>holy men were they.</p>
			<p class="t0">He thought, among the wreckage,<span class="hst">  </span>food might still lie hidden;</p>
			<p class="t0">But, through fear of the wicked griffins,<span class="hst">  </span>he softly crept to the shore, by hunger bidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">No one could he find there,<span class="hst">  </span>but a body in armor alone;</p>
			<p class="t0">Thereby the wild old griffin<span class="hst">  </span>hard work would give him soon.</p>
			<p class="t0">Out from his armor he shook him,<span class="hst">  </span>nor did he spurn to wear it:</p>
			<p class="t0">He found a bow and weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>by its side, on the sandy shore, lying near it.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With these himself he girded,<span class="hst">  </span>that simple little child;</p>
			<p class="t0">When in the air above him<span class="hst">  </span>he heard a rushing wild.</p>
			<p class="t0">He wished that he had loitered,<span class="hst">  </span>the sorry little master;</p>
			<p class="t0">But quickly came the griffin;<span class="hst">  </span>to the sheltering cavern fain would he flee the faster.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The bird swung down in anger<span class="hst">  </span>to the sandy beach and foam;</p>
			<p class="t0">The little playmate and fellow<span class="hst">  </span>of the young it left at home,</p>
			<p class="t0">Would by the angry griffin<span class="hst">  </span>have at once been swallowed;</p>
			<p class="t0">But now the bold young Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>the ways of a daring foeman bravely followed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He with strength but youthful<span class="hst">  </span>the tightened string drew out,</p>
			<p class="t0">And arrows swift and many<span class="hst">  </span>from the well-bent bow he shot.</p>
			<p class="t0">Alas! he did not hit him;<span class="hst">  </span>what hope of his ill-luck turning?</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he of the sword bethought him;<span class="hst">  </span>he heard the maids bewailing him and mourning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Tho’ his years were not yet many,<span class="hst">  </span>he still was brave enough;</p>
			<p class="t0">A wing from the angry griffin<span class="hst">  </span>he struck at the shoulder off,</p>
			<p class="t0">And in the leg he smote him<span class="hst">  </span>a heavier blow and stronger;</p>
			<p class="t0">So that his wounded body<span class="hst">  </span>the bird away from the spot could drag no longer.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The boy was now the winner;<span class="hst">  </span>one of his foes lay dead;</p>
			<p class="t0">But quickly came another,<span class="hst">  </span>who sorrow for him made.</p>
			<p class="t0">All at last were slaughtered;<span class="hst">  </span>nor old nor young were living;</p>
			<p class="t0">God in heaven helped him;<span class="hst">  </span>but truly against such strength ’twere hopeless striving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he that feat of wonder<span class="hst">  </span>had done, with heart so brave,</p>
			<p class="t0">He called the friendly maidens<span class="hst">  </span>from out their rocky cave.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Let air and sunshine<span class="hst">  </span>your sorry hearts be filling;</p>
			<p class="t0">Since now the God in heaven<span class="hst">  </span>to grant to us some bliss at last is willing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His call they kindly welcomed,<span class="hst">  </span>and many times, forsooth,</p>
			<p class="t0">The boy by the lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>was kissed upon the mouth.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their keeper now lay lifeless;<span class="hst">  </span>and none there was to hinder</p>
			<p class="t0">Their roaming o’er the hillsides,<span class="hst">  </span>and, far or near, at their good-will to wander.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By help of the boy, from sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>they now were wholly free;</p>
			<p class="t0">The little childish wanderer,<span class="hst">  </span>so skilled with the bow was he,</p>
			<p class="t0">That birds his well-shot arrows<span class="hst">  </span>could never shun by flying.</p>
			<p class="t0">He shot them now for pastime;<span class="hst">  </span>but to get them soon for food must he be trying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He in heart was daring,<span class="hst">  </span>he was mild, but also brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hey! from the wild beasts learning,<span class="hst">  </span>what nimble leaps he gave!</p>
			<p class="t0">As doth the strong young panther,<span class="hst">  </span>over the rocks he scrambled;</p>
			<p class="t0">Himself was his only teacher,<span class="hst">  </span>and, far away from kin, alone he rambled.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While on the shore, by the waters,<span class="hst">  </span>his time he often spent,</p>
			<p class="t0">He saw, among the sea-waves,<span class="hst">  </span>live fishes, as he went;</p>
			<p class="t0">To catch them it were easy,<span class="hst">  </span>but yet he did not get them,</p>
			<p class="t0">For with fire his kitchen smoked not.<span class="hst">  </span>Daily his sorrow grew that he could not eat them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Oft from his rocky shelter<span class="hst">  </span>to the forest he would roam;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many wild beasts saw he,<span class="hst">  </span>strong and grim in their home.</p>
			<p class="t0">One there was among them<span class="hst">  </span>greedy to devour him;</p>
			<p class="t0">But with his sword he slew him,<span class="hst">  </span>and let him quickly feel the hate he bore him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Unto a wild chameleon<span class="hst">  </span>this dreadful thing was like;</p>
			<p class="t0">Its skin the boy drew from it,<span class="hst">  </span>(for that was he not too weak;)</p>
			<p class="t0">Now for its blood he thirsted,<span class="hst">  </span>and, when of this he had taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">He felt great strength come o’er him;<span class="hst">  </span>and many thoughts began in him to waken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then with the skin of the monster<span class="hst">  </span>he wrapped himself around;</p>
			<p class="t0">When soon to him it happened<span class="hst">  </span>hard by a lion he found.</p>
			<p class="t0">To shun him it were hopeless,<span class="hst">  </span>for he quickly rushed upon him;</p>
			<p class="t0">But the boy was yet unwounded;<span class="hst">  </span>his foe from the daring child warm welcome won him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he the lion had smitten<span class="hst">  </span>to death, with many blows,</p>
			<p class="t0">He to the cave would take it,<span class="hst">  </span>as homeward thence he goes.</p>
			<p class="t0">At all times had the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>been by his care upholden,</p>
			<p class="t0">But now this food unwonted<span class="hst">  </span>did raise their waning strength, and their hearts embolden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of fire they yet knew nothing,<span class="hst">  </span>but wood they need not seek;</p>
			<p class="t0">From out a stone he quickly<span class="hst">  </span>many sparks did strike.</p>
			<p class="t0">The food they long had wanted<span class="hst">  </span>he soon was on them bestowing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, since there was none to do it,<span class="hst">  </span>themselves the flesh must cook on the coals now glowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they of food had eaten,<span class="hst">  </span>at once they grew more strong;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their boldness, too, grew greater,<span class="hst">  </span>(to God their thanks belong.)</p>
			<p class="t0">And now their bodies also<span class="hst">  </span>as healthy were, and comely,</p>
			<p class="t0">As if they still were living,<span class="hst">  </span>each in her father-land, on fare more homely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The wild young Hagen also<span class="hst">  </span>the strength of twelve did own;</p>
			<p class="t0">And for this, thro’ all his lifetime,<span class="hst">  </span>praise by him was won.</p>
			<p class="t0">But both to him and the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>’twas pain and sorrow only,</p>
			<p class="t0">To think that they forever<span class="hst">  </span>must pass their lives in a waste so sad and lonely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They begged of him to lead them<span class="hst">  </span>down to the watery flood.</p>
			<p class="t0">Shame they felt in going,<span class="hst">  </span>for the clothes were none too good</p>
			<p class="t0">The maidens now were wearing;<span class="hst">  </span>they themselves had sewed them,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere yet the youthful Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>them in their banishment found, and his kindness showed them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For days full four and twenty<span class="hst">  </span>they fared thro’ the piny wood;</p>
			<p class="t0">At last, on a morning early,<span class="hst">  </span>down they came to the flood,</p>
			<p class="t0">And saw a laden galley,<span class="hst">  </span>that came from Garadé.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then did the lonely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>sorrow and pain at the sailors’ plight betray.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen shouted loudly;<span class="hst">  </span>he was hindered none the more,</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ the winds were boisterous,<span class="hst">  </span>and wild the waves did roar.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the ship was groaning;<span class="hst">  </span>and the sailors, landward steering,</p>
			<p class="t0">Felt dread of water-nixes,<span class="hst">  </span>on seeing the maids, as they the shore were nearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The ship it had a master,<span class="hst">  </span>a lord from out Salmé;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen, as well as his kindred,<span class="hst">  </span>had he known on a former day.</p>
			<p class="t0">They before were neighbors,<span class="hst">  </span>but Ireland’s child, here roaming,</p>
			<p class="t0">The youthful son of Sigeband,<span class="hst">  </span>was to the pilgrims unknown, who now were coming.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The earl forbade his steersman<span class="hst">  </span>nearer to sail to the shore;</p>
			<p class="t0">But now the childish outcast<span class="hst">  </span>but begged of them the more,</p>
			<p class="t0">For love of God, to take them<span class="hst">  </span>away from that shore forsaken.</p>
			<p class="t0">The sailors felt emboldened,<span class="hst">  </span>when by the boy the name of Christ was taken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The earl, with eleven others,<span class="hst">  </span>into a boat now sprung;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere he the truth was learning,<span class="hst">  </span>the time to him seemed long.</p>
			<p class="t0">Whether the maidens as goblins<span class="hst">  </span>or mermaids must be treated</p>
			<p class="t0">He knew not; such beings never,<span class="hst">  </span>in all his life before, his eyes had greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He first began to ask them,<span class="hst">  </span>before he reached the strand:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Boy, have you been baptized?<span class="hst">  </span>What do you in this land?”</p>
			<p class="t0">Dight with fresh green mosses<span class="hst">  </span>he saw those lovely daughters,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who earnestly begged the sailors<span class="hst">  </span>that they would deign to take them o’er the waters.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c3">Tale the Third.<br/><span class="small">HOW HAGEN SAILED TO HIS HOME.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ere they went on shipboard,<span class="hst">  </span>the pilgrims them besought</p>
			<p class="t0">Kindly to take the clothing<span class="hst">  </span>they with them had brought.</p>
			<p class="t0">However shy were the maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>to wear them they were ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">They donned the clothes with blushes,<span class="hst">  </span>and now their sorrow had an ending speedy.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as the lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>embarked upon the wave,</p>
			<p class="t0">They heartily were greeted<span class="hst">  </span>by knights both good and brave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who to the high-born daughters<span class="hst">  </span>welcome to give were heedful;</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ they at first mistook them,<span class="hst">  </span>and thought them wicked elves, or mermaids dreadful.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">That night the maidens rested<span class="hst">  </span>with friends upon the sea;</p>
			<p class="t0">So wondrous was their dwelling,<span class="hst">  </span>from fear they were not free:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wiser it were in the children<span class="hst">  </span>to think this home a blessing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon as the earl had bidden,<span class="hst">  </span>their food upon the maids they all were pressing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After they had eaten,<span class="hst">  </span>and while with them he sat,</p>
			<p class="t0">The lord of the land of Garadie<span class="hst">  </span>the maidens did entreat</p>
			<p class="t0">To say by whom such fair ones<span class="hst">  </span>were brought unto that shore.</p>
			<p class="t0">The children, at his asking,<span class="hst">  </span>only felt their sorrow grow the more.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First answered him the eldest<span class="hst">  </span>of those who with him sat:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I come from a far-off kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>(my lord, now hear my fate;)</p>
			<p class="t0">I was born in the land of India,<span class="hst">  </span>a land wherein my father</p>
			<p class="t0">Was king while he was living,<span class="hst">  </span>but I, alas! the crown must leave to another.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the maid next younger:<span class="hst">  </span>“I too have come from far;</p>
			<p class="t0">Erewhile a strong old griffin<span class="hst">  </span>did me from Portugal bear.</p>
			<p class="t0">A king in the land was my father;<span class="hst">  </span>none than he was prouder,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor for a mighty ruler,<span class="hst">  </span>far or near, were ever praises louder.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the youngest maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>who by the earl sat near,</p>
			<p class="t0">To him spoke low and modestly,<span class="hst">  </span>and said: “I pray you hear;</p>
			<p class="t0">From Iserland I was carried,<span class="hst">  </span>my father there held power;</p>
			<p class="t0">But from those who hoped to rear me,<span class="hst">  </span>alas! afar was I borne in an evil hour.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high-born knight then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“By God ’tis ordered well,</p>
			<p class="t0">Since you among your kinsfolk<span class="hst">  </span>not long were left to dwell;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now, at last, by his kindness<span class="hst">  </span>you are freed from dangers,</p>
			<p class="t0">For I within these borders<span class="hst">  </span>have found you living here, such lovely strangers.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">However much he asked them,<span class="hst">  </span>they yet to tell were loath,</p>
			<p class="t0">How unto them it happened<span class="hst">  </span>grim death had spared them both,</p>
			<p class="t0">When erewhiles the griffin<span class="hst">  </span>unto his nest had brought them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many had been their sorrows;<span class="hst">  </span>no more to speak of these the maids bethought them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the worthy leader,<span class="hst">  </span>turning to the youth;</p>
			<p class="t0">“My dearest friend and fellow,<span class="hst">  </span>now let me hear the truth;</p>
			<p class="t0">Since unto me these maidens<span class="hst">  </span>their sorry tale have given,</p>
			<p class="t0">From you would I hear gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and learn the land and kin whence you were riven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him wild Hagen answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That will I tell to you;</p>
			<p class="t0">One of those dreadful griffins<span class="hst">  </span>bore me hither too.</p>
			<p class="t0">Sigeband was my father;<span class="hst">  </span>in Ireland once was I living;</p>
			<p class="t0">But long with these lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>I since have dwelt, with many sorrows striving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then they all besought him<span class="hst">  </span>to say how it befell</p>
			<p class="t0">That, living with the griffins<span class="hst">  </span>he had come off so well.</p>
			<p class="t0">To them young Hagen answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To God it all was owing;</p>
			<p class="t0">But now I have cooled my anger;<span class="hst">  </span>no more for them my heart with hate is glowing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the lord of Garadie:<span class="hst">  </span>“I fain would learn from you</p>
			<p class="t0">How you were freed from danger?”<span class="hst">  </span>He said: “I quickly slew</p>
			<p class="t0">Both the old and the young ones;<span class="hst">  </span>not one of those is living</p>
			<p class="t0">By whom my life was threatened,<span class="hst">  </span>and who to me such fear were daily giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said all the sailors:<span class="hst">  </span>“Your strength indeed was great;</p>
			<p class="t0">For every man and woman<span class="hst">  </span>to praise you it were meet.</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand of us truly<span class="hst">  </span>’gainst them in, vain had striven,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor ever could have slain them;<span class="hst">  </span>truly to you have blessings great been given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The earl and all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>were of the boy afraid;</p>
			<p class="t0">His strength was past all measure,<span class="hst">  </span>and sorrow for them made.</p>
			<p class="t0">They would by craft his weapons<span class="hst">  </span>have taken from him gladly,</p>
			<p class="t0">But these he sternly guarded,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon, thro’ him, it ended for them sadly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the earl yet further:<span class="hst">  </span>“It now has happened well,</p>
			<p class="t0">After our toilsome wanderings,<span class="hst">  </span>and all that us befell.</p>
			<p class="t0">But since you are a kinsman<span class="hst">  </span>of my foeman, Sigeband,</p>
			<p class="t0">And here have come from Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>I as a hostage hold you in my hand.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“You come to me most fitly,<span class="hst">  </span>as you shall know ere long,</p>
			<p class="t0">For many of your kindred<span class="hst">  </span>have done to me great wrong.</p>
			<p class="t0">In Garadie’s fair kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>which lies too near their border,</p>
			<p class="t0">In a heavy fight, my warriors<span class="hst">  </span>were seized upon and murdered by their shameful order.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered him young Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Of all the wrongs they did</p>
			<p class="t0">I am wholly guiltless;<span class="hst">  </span>if me to them you lead</p>
			<p class="t0">I their hearts will soften,<span class="hst">  </span>and so will the strife be ended.</p>
			<p class="t0">Let hope to me be granted<span class="hst">  </span>that I on my kinsmen’s shore may soon be landed.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the earl to Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“For a pledge must you abide,</p>
			<p class="t0">And I shall keep these maidens<span class="hst">  </span>to live at court by my side;</p>
			<p class="t0">They will swell my greatness,<span class="hst">  </span>and I shall be their owner.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then thought the youthful Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>such words to be to him a wrong and a dishonor.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He quickly said in anger:<span class="hst">  </span>“No bondsman will I be;</p>
			<p class="t0">That may no man ask for,<span class="hst">  </span>who would unscathed go free.</p>
			<p class="t0">And now, my worthy sailors,<span class="hst">  </span>you needs to my land must bear me;</p>
			<p class="t0">I will reward you gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and to give you clothes and gold will never spare me.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“The earl has thought my maidens<span class="hst">  </span>his own shall ever be;</p>
			<p class="t0">But they shall yet be happy,<span class="hst">  </span>and shall of him be free.</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoe’er is blest with wisdom,<span class="hst">  </span>let him my bidding follow;</p>
			<p class="t0">Look to your sails, and turn them,<span class="hst">  </span>and guide the ship to Ireland, o’er the billow.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The men, as the earl had bidden,<span class="hst">  </span>to seize the boy now dared,</p>
			<p class="t0">But boldly did he meet them,<span class="hst">  </span>and for their lives they feared.</p>
			<p class="t0">He by the hair caught thirty,<span class="hst">  </span>and into the water flung them;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon the strength of his body<span class="hst">  </span>was known to all, and dreaded much among them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Had not the kindly maidens<span class="hst">  </span>sought to end the fight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon the earl of Garadie<span class="hst">  </span>he would have killed outright.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Gainst neither low nor mighty<span class="hst">  </span>did his anger falter;</p>
			<p class="t0">These warriors and sailors<span class="hst">  </span>now to Ireland’s shores their way must alter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They began at once to hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>lest he their lives might take;</p>
			<p class="t0">For now the wrath of Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>made them with fear to quake.</p>
			<p class="t0">For seventeen days the sailors<span class="hst">  </span>from toiling never rested,</p>
			<p class="t0">And sorely were they frightened;<span class="hst">  </span>whene’er he seemed unkind they ills forecasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he now drew nearer<span class="hst">  </span>unto his father’s shore,</p>
			<p class="t0">He saw the roomy castles<span class="hst">  </span>he well had known before;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon a lofty palace<span class="hst">  </span>he spied at the edge of the river;</p>
			<p class="t0">Three hundred towers fully<span class="hst">  </span>he there beheld, as strong and good as ever.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In it dwelt King Sigeband,<span class="hst">  </span>with his proud and queenly wife.</p>
			<p class="t0">Again each pilgrim sailor<span class="hst">  </span>thought to lose his life;</p>
			<p class="t0">For should the lord of Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>aught of them be learning,</p>
			<p class="t0">They feared that he would slay them;<span class="hst">  </span>but Hagen stood between, his anger turning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake unto the pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>that brave and warlike man:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Your peace will I make gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>altho’ I do not reign;</p>
			<p class="t0">I hold no sway in the kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>but thither will I be sending,</p>
			<p class="t0">And ’twixt yourself and my father<span class="hst">  </span>of the hatred old I soon will make an ending.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Would any now be doing<span class="hst">  </span>what wealth to him will bring,</p>
			<p class="t0">Let him my errand carry.<span class="hst">  </span>Whoever to the king</p>
			<p class="t0">Shall say what I shall bid him,<span class="hst">  </span>gold will I give him truly;</p>
			<p class="t0">And also, very gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>my father and my mother will reward him duly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Twelve of the stranded pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>he bade to ride away:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now ask of the king, my father,”<span class="hst">  </span>thus the youth did say,</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whether to see young Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>his son, he still is yearning,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Him who erst by the griffin<span class="hst">  </span>was stolen far away, heart-sorrow learning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I know that what you tell him<span class="hst">  </span>the king will not believe;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then ask you of my mother<span class="hst">  </span>if she her faith will give,</p>
			<p class="t0">And if for her child to own me<span class="hst">  </span>she will at last be willing,</p>
			<p class="t0">If I upon my bosom<span class="hst">  </span>will show a golden cross, the proof fulfilling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When those he sent had ridden<span class="hst">  </span>farther into the land,</p>
			<p class="t0">They found, in the palace seated,<span class="hst">  </span>Queen U-te and Sigeband.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then knew the king that the riders<span class="hst">  </span>from Garadie came thither,</p>
			<p class="t0">And that they to him were foemen;<span class="hst">  </span>at this both he and his men were wroth together.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He asked of them how dared they<span class="hst">  </span>to come within his land?</p>
			<p class="t0">Then one among them answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“We are sent here at the hand</p>
			<p class="t0">Of your son, the youthful Hagen.<span class="hst">  </span>If any fain would meet him,</p>
			<p class="t0">He now is here, so near you,<span class="hst">  </span>that you ere many hours, in truth, may greet him.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the kingly Sigeband:<span class="hst">  </span>“To cheat there is no need;</p>
			<p class="t0">The loss of my dear little one,<span class="hst">  </span>who hath so long been dead,</p>
			<p class="t0">Still my heart’s deep sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>doth too oft awaken.”</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ask, then, the queen, your lady,<span class="hst">  </span>if for a falsehood should our word be taken?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“The little boy so often<span class="hst">  </span>in her fond care has been,</p>
			<p class="t0">She knows if on his bosom<span class="hst">  </span>a golden cross was seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">And if upon this wanderer<span class="hst">  </span>be found the self-same token,</p>
			<p class="t0">You as your child can own him;<span class="hst">  </span>you then will grant that truth by us is spoken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the Lady U-te<span class="hst">  </span>the tale was quickly told;</p>
			<p class="t0">Glad was she of the tidings,<span class="hst">  </span>yet mourned she as of old.</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “Now let us hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>that the truth no more be hidden.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Her lord then bade to saddle;<span class="hst">  </span>and steeds for himself and his bravest knights were bidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Straightway one of the pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>to the fair Queen U-te said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I will tell you, if you listen,<span class="hst">  </span>what now to do you need.</p>
			<p class="t0">You first must carry clothing<span class="hst">  </span>for each young lovely maiden</p>
			<p class="t0">Whose coming does you honor;<span class="hst">  </span>as followers of your son were they hither bidden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon brought they richest clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>and tiring-women, too;</p>
			<p class="t0">The queen was also followed<span class="hst">  </span>by men both brave and true.</p>
			<p class="t0">They found the youthful Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>who on the shore was standing;</p>
			<p class="t0">And many men from Garadie,<span class="hst">  </span>who with the wandering boy on the beach were landing.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c4">Tale the Fourth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HAGEN WAS MET BY HIS FATHER AND MOTHER.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon both men and women<span class="hst">  </span>riding there were seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the brave young Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>went forth to meet his kin.</p>
			<p class="t0">Who ’twas that came to greet him<span class="hst">  </span>he now to know was seeking;</p>
			<p class="t0">The throng grew ever thicker<span class="hst">  </span>of friends who came in haste, their kindness speaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king a friendly welcome<span class="hst">  </span>into his land soon gave;</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “To send men hither<span class="hst">  </span>did you the boldness have,</p>
			<p class="t0">To say that our queen beloved<span class="hst">  </span>is in truth your mother?</p>
			<p class="t0">If the words are true you’ve spoken,<span class="hst">  </span>so glad as now I am there’s not another.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His queen, the lovely U-te,<span class="hst">  </span>with lofty breeding, said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Bid that for these new-comers<span class="hst">  </span>lodgings now be made;</p>
			<p class="t0">I shall know right easily<span class="hst">  </span>if he for the crown is fitted.”</p>
			<p class="t0">She found, in truth, the token,<span class="hst">  </span>and, full of bliss, her youthful son she greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With eyes all wet with weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>she kissed him on the mouth:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Though I before was ailing,<span class="hst">  </span>I now am well in sooth.</p>
			<p class="t0">Welcome be thou, my Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>my only child, loved dearly!</p>
			<p class="t0">All in the land of Sigeband<span class="hst">  </span>right glad shall be for him they lost so early.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king to the youth came nearer;<span class="hst">  </span>his happiness was great.</p>
			<p class="t0">For the hearty love he bore him<span class="hst">  </span>his manly cheek was wet;</p>
			<p class="t0">With tears that hot had risen<span class="hst">  </span>his eyes were overflowing.</p>
			<p class="t0">For the child, from him erst stolen,<span class="hst">  </span>rightly the father felt the love he was showing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The queenly U-te welcomed<span class="hst">  </span>the homeless maids that day;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many clothes she gave them,<span class="hst">  </span>both bright in hue and gray,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of silk, with downy linings,<span class="hst">  </span>that much the maidens wanted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their sorrows now were lightened<span class="hst">  </span>by all the gifts the wife of Sigeband granted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Well they clothed the maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>as their loveliness became;</p>
			<p class="t0">This they long had needed,<span class="hst">  </span>and oft had blushed with shame;</p>
			<p class="t0">But, decked with gaudy trimmings,<span class="hst">  </span>now they came less shyly.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king and all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>soon to the maidens gave a welcome freely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen asked that friendship<span class="hst">  </span>to the men of Garadie</p>
			<p class="t0">Should by the king and his lieges<span class="hst">  </span>be granted speedily;</p>
			<p class="t0">Beseeching his forgiveness<span class="hst">  </span>for all their foul misdoing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon, at the wish of Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>kindness to the pilgrims he was showing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the king had kissed them<span class="hst">  </span>and soothed his angry mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">He to the shipwrecked pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>made their losses good.</p>
			<p class="t0">To them it was a blessing,<span class="hst">  </span>and praise to Hagen carried;</p>
			<p class="t0">The lands of the men of Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>never since have they as foemen harried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then their food and clothing<span class="hst">  </span>the guests took out, for use,</p>
			<p class="t0">And up on the sands they bore them,<span class="hst">  </span>trusting in Hagen’s truce;</p>
			<p class="t0">To take their rest for a fortnight<span class="hst">  </span>them did he embolden.</p>
			<p class="t0">The band of haughty pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>to give to him their thanks were now beholden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then, in the midst of uproar,<span class="hst">  </span>they rode away from the shore;</p>
			<p class="t0">Up the castle of Ballian<span class="hst">  </span>came also many more,</p>
			<p class="t0">Led by a tale of wonder<span class="hst">  </span>that the son of the king was living,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Of their king so rich and mighty;<span class="hst">  </span>a thing so strange was to many past believing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The water-weary pilgrims,<span class="hst">  </span>long-tossed upon the sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">When fourteen days were ended<span class="hst">  </span>to leave the land were free.</p>
			<p class="t0">To them by the host were given<span class="hst">  </span>gifts of gold, bright shining;</p>
			<p class="t0">By the help of his son’s great kindness<span class="hst">  </span>he hoped a lasting friendship to be winning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen his maidens never<span class="hst">  </span>henceforth unthought-of leaves;</p>
			<p class="t0">Kindly doth he teach them<span class="hst">  </span>ofttimes to bathe in the waves.</p>
			<p class="t0">He showed himself most loving,<span class="hst">  </span>ever for them caring;</p>
			<p class="t0">Rich clothes to them were given,<span class="hst">  </span>and wise beyond his years was all his bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now was the youth beginning<span class="hst">  </span>to be a man well-grown.</p>
			<p class="t0">He ever showed his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>the skill to warriors known;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er a knight befitteth<span class="hst">  </span>with hand and weapon doing.</p>
			<p class="t0">In the land of his father, Sigeband,<span class="hst">  </span>his mighty sway he soon to all was showing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen was ever learning<span class="hst">  </span>what doth a king beseem.</p>
			<p class="t0">He who of knights is leader<span class="hst">  </span>must ever free from shame</p>
			<p class="t0">And every stain be living;<span class="hst">  </span>this earns fair women’s praises.</p>
			<p class="t0">So gentle was he truly<span class="hst">  </span>that every one with wonder on him gazes.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Brave he was and daring,<span class="hst">  </span>(such is the olden song,)</p>
			<p class="t0">And ever was he ready<span class="hst">  </span>to right his neighbor’s wrong.</p>
			<p class="t0">He high upheld his honor<span class="hst">  </span>in all things, never fearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Throughout the land, his praises<span class="hst">  </span>were spoken and were sung in all men’s hearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In a waste he grew to manhood,<span class="hst">  </span>that youthful son of a king,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wild beasts his only fellows;<span class="hst">  </span>but none so quick could spring</p>
			<p class="t0">That they to flee were able,<span class="hst">  </span>if he for them was striving.</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween both he and his maidens<span class="hst">  </span>had wonders seen, while by the waters living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Rightly his name was Hagen;<span class="hst">  </span>but later men did own</p>
			<p class="t0">He was “of kings the Devil;”<span class="hst">  </span>so came he to be known</p>
			<p class="t0">In every land and kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>such was his strength in fighting.</p>
			<p class="t0">The bold and wild young Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>well did earn his name, his foemen smiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He oft was begged by his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>that he a wife would take;</p>
			<p class="t0">One so fair was near him<span class="hst">  </span>that none had need to seek</p>
			<p class="t0">A fairer or a lovelier,<span class="hst">  </span>all earthly kingdoms over.</p>
			<p class="t0">He himself had taught her;<span class="hst">  </span>with her in sorrow grown, and now her lover.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She bore the name of Hilda;<span class="hst">  </span>from India she had come,</p>
			<p class="t0">And love she oft had shown him<span class="hst">  </span>under their wretched doom,</p>
			<p class="t0">Since, in their early childhood,<span class="hst">  </span>he in the cave had found her.</p>
			<p class="t0">None better need he wish for,<span class="hst">  </span>or seek in any land the heavens under.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His father bade him hasten<span class="hst">  </span>to be knighted with the sword,</p>
			<p class="t0">With a hundred of his vassals.<span class="hst">  </span>He gave, with kindly word,</p>
			<p class="t0">To him and to his maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>for clothes and horses needed,</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand marks of silver.<span class="hst">  </span>Hagen said that the will of his father should be heeded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The news of this was bruited<span class="hst">  </span>through many a prince’s land;</p>
			<p class="t0">And the day when it should happen<span class="hst">  </span>all did understand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon the king’s great kindness<span class="hst">  </span>from all won praises golden</p>
			<p class="t0">In a year and three days after<span class="hst">  </span>the festival of knighting them was holden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For this the knights made busy,<span class="hst">  </span>glad to be bidden there.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon they made them bucklers,<span class="hst">  </span>bright and painted fair;</p>
			<p class="t0">In making showy saddles<span class="hst">  </span>the workmen were not idle;</p>
			<p class="t0">With gold both red and shining<span class="hst">  </span>the breastplate was bedecked, as was the bridle.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon a broad green meadow<span class="hst">  </span>the guests of the mighty king</p>
			<p class="t0">Were bidden then to gather.<span class="hst">  </span>He left not anything</p>
			<p class="t0">That they from him could ask for;<span class="hst">  </span>seats were spread in order,</p>
			<p class="t0">And many guests soon after<span class="hst">  </span>were seen to ride to his land from every border.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To those from far now ready<span class="hst">  </span>the sword with him to bear</p>
			<p class="t0">Fighting-gear was given,<span class="hst">  </span>that beseemed them well to wear.</p>
			<p class="t0">They who from other kingdoms<span class="hst">  </span>into his land were faring</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand men were reckoned;<span class="hst">  </span>to give them clothes and steeds he was not sparing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Unto his friends then said he:<span class="hst">  </span>“If now you deem it fit</p>
			<p class="t0">That men a king should call me,<span class="hst">  </span>it therefore seemeth meet</p>
			<p class="t0">That she my heart holds dearest<span class="hst">  </span>a crown with me be wearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Never shall I rest happy<span class="hst">  </span>until, for her love to me, she this is sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then asked of him his followers<span class="hst">  </span>who might the lady be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who, riding proudly before them,<span class="hst">  </span>they at court should see?</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Her name is Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>in India once living;</p>
			<p class="t0">To me and to my kindred<span class="hst">  </span>she, as our queen, no shame will e’er be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Well pleased was now his mother,<span class="hst">  </span>when she the tidings had,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they thought to crown the lady;<span class="hst">  </span>his father, too was glad.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of them was she so worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>that high in heart they set her.</p>
			<p class="t0">With him the sword was taken<span class="hst">  </span>by full six hundred; the number e’en was greater.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As is the way of Christians,<span class="hst">  </span>both of them were bid</p>
			<p class="t0">First for the crown to be hallowed;<span class="hst">  </span>this at once they did.</p>
			<p class="t0">King Hagen with Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>in state were soon seen riding;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many games of knighthood<span class="hst">  </span>were played at court by his men, at Hagen’s bidding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Sigeband, too, rode with them;<span class="hst">  </span>high rose his heart as he went;</p>
			<p class="t0">He reckoned very little<span class="hst">  </span>the wealth that must be spent.</p>
			<p class="t0">When in jousts they had ridden,<span class="hst">  </span>in ways most true and knightly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then were pages busy<span class="hst">  </span>to make the halls for the guests all fair and sightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Seats were brought together,<span class="hst">  </span>strong, and broad, and long,</p>
			<p class="t0">With stools besides, and tables.<span class="hst">  </span>After the mass was sung,</p>
			<p class="t0">U-te, his wife, came riding,<span class="hst">  </span>with women round her thronging;</p>
			<p class="t0">These the youthful warriors<span class="hst">  </span>to gaze on, as they rode, right earnestly were longing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While the great King Sigeband<span class="hst">  </span>sat by U-te’s side,</p>
			<p class="t0">And Hagen next to Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>all looked on with pride;</p>
			<p class="t0">And said, in his child-belovéd<span class="hst">  </span>happy was their master.</p>
			<p class="t0">Before them, while at table,<span class="hst">  </span>the throng was great; the clash of spears grew faster.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After the king of Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>at the meal his fill had eat,</p>
			<p class="t0">By riders the grass was trodden;<span class="hst">  </span>flowers to dust they beat</p>
			<p class="t0">With rude and heavy trampling,<span class="hst">  </span>while in uproar riding.</p>
			<p class="t0">The men best known for bravery,<span class="hst">  </span>before the fair, in knightly jousts were leading.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Four and twenty warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>bearing well the shield,</p>
			<p class="t0">Over the plain came riding;<span class="hst">  </span>bold were they in the field,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now in many a struggle<span class="hst">  </span>all their strength were spending.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas done in sight of the ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>and hard it was of their games to make an ending.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The brave young son of Sigeband<span class="hst">  </span>himself in the onset rode.</p>
			<p class="t0">Not loth was she to gaze on him<span class="hst">  </span>who her with hope had wooed;</p>
			<p class="t0">That she to him was friendly<span class="hst">  </span>in a far-off land forsaken,</p>
			<p class="t0">For this would he reward her.<span class="hst">  </span>No truer knight the sword had ever taken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Amid the throngs here riding,<span class="hst">  </span>one thro’ the dust might see</p>
			<p class="t0">Men whose birth was princely,<span class="hst">  </span>in number twelve and three;</p>
			<p class="t0">The Christian and the heathen<span class="hst">  </span>to him their fiefs were owing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And honor now, right heartily,<span class="hst">  </span>to Sigeband and Hagen they were showing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Long those high times lasted;<span class="hst">  </span>their mirth, how loud it rose!</p>
			<p class="t0">With crowding and with shouting<span class="hst">  </span>great the bustle grows.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king now bade the champions<span class="hst">  </span>to end the strife so heated;</p>
			<p class="t0">And leave to them was given<span class="hst">  </span>that they beside the ladies should be seated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before his friends and kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>then spake King Sigeband:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Unto my dear son Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>give I now my land,</p>
			<p class="t0">With the dwellers and the strongholds,<span class="hst">  </span>be they far or nearer.</p>
			<p class="t0">Let all my trusty liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>have him now for their lord, and hold none dearer.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As soon as his father, Sigeband,<span class="hst">  </span>his sway did thus forego,</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen his lands and castles<span class="hst">  </span>began in fief to bestow;</p>
			<p class="t0">This he did right freely,<span class="hst">  </span>and to those to whom he gave them</p>
			<p class="t0">He seemed so true and worthy<span class="hst">  </span>that they indeed from him would gladly have them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As by feudal law is rightful,<span class="hst">  </span>many stretched the hand</p>
			<p class="t0">To the youthful king in fealty.<span class="hst">  </span>To all, from every land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or far or near, then gave he<span class="hst">  </span>clothes and riches hoarded.</p>
			<p class="t0">A feast so freely given<span class="hst">  </span>would now the poor not harm, and with thanks be rewarded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At court now dwelt the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>who had before been brought</p>
			<p class="t0">With him within those borders;<span class="hst">  </span>of these one now was sought,</p>
			<p class="t0">And sent to the king and Hilda;<span class="hst">  </span>there she soon was dwelling.</p>
			<p class="t0">The maid it was from Iserland;<span class="hst">  </span>of one more fair to see none e’er was telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A princely youth soon wooed her,<span class="hst">  </span>who saw the maiden fair</p>
			<p class="t0">Beside the king’s fair daughter.<span class="hst">  </span>Soothly might he swear</p>
			<p class="t0">That she by right was worthy<span class="hst">  </span>to be of a crown the wearer.</p>
			<p class="t0">She had erst been Hilda’s playmate;<span class="hst">  </span>of widespread lands she now became the sharer.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last the guests were scattered,<span class="hst">  </span>and all now left the king.</p>
			<p class="t0">That high-born lady also<span class="hst">  </span>men did straightway bring</p>
			<p class="t0">Into the land of Norway,<span class="hst">  </span>to her youthful lord’s kind keeping.</p>
			<p class="t0">After her heavy sorrows,<span class="hst">  </span>blest with hope, she knew no more of weeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now, throughout all Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>did Hagen his sway begin.</p>
			<p class="t0">If ever among his lieges<span class="hst">  </span>a deed of wrong was seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">At once for this the doer<span class="hst">  </span>must pay with pain well dreaded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of such, within a twelvemonth,<span class="hst">  </span>eighty or more were for evil deeds beheaded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">An inroad made he later<span class="hst">  </span>into the lands of his foes.</p>
			<p class="t0">He spared the poor, and brought not<span class="hst">  </span>flames, to add to their woes;</p>
			<p class="t0">But if with pride and rudeness<span class="hst">  </span>he was by any treated,</p>
			<p class="t0">He quick laid waste their strongholds,<span class="hst">  </span>and deadly wounds in bitter wrath he meted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When it came to fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>he was a goodly knight.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of heroes high in breeding<span class="hst">  </span>he soon brought low the might;</p>
			<p class="t0">To all he showed his bravery,<span class="hst">  </span>whether far or near him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of kings was he the Devil;<span class="hst">  </span>in truth his many foes might greatly fear him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The life he led was happy,<span class="hst">  </span>nor of gladness asked he more.</p>
			<p class="t0">His wife, from far-off India,<span class="hst">  </span>to her lord and master bore</p>
			<p class="t0">A fair and lovely daughter;<span class="hst">  </span>she also, like her mother,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bore the name of Hilda;<span class="hst">  </span>well known is her tale to us, and to many another.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wild Hagen bade his maidens<span class="hst">  </span>so to rear the child,</p>
			<p class="t0">That the sun ne’er shone upon her;<span class="hst">  </span>nor were rough winds wild</p>
			<p class="t0">Oft allowed to touch her.<span class="hst">  </span>She was by ladies guarded,</p>
			<p class="t0">And cared for by her kinsmen;<span class="hst">  </span>most wisely was the trust to them awarded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before twelve years were ended<span class="hst">  </span>the fair and well-born maid</p>
			<p class="t0">Was comely more than any,<span class="hst">  </span>and her name was widely spread;</p>
			<p class="t0">Rich and high-born princes<span class="hst">  </span>gladly would have sought her,</p>
			<p class="t0">And earnestly were thinking<span class="hst">  </span>how they could win wild Hagen’s lovely daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One of these same princes<span class="hst">  </span>in Denmark had his home,</p>
			<p class="t0">Within the land of Waleis.<span class="hst">  </span>When the tale to him had come</p>
			<p class="t0">About this lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>his longing ne’er would leave him;</p>
			<p class="t0">But he was scorned by Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>who swore of life and name he would bereave him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whene’er to seek the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>men were by wooers sent,</p>
			<p class="t0">In his pride, wild Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>upon their death was bent.</p>
			<p class="t0">He to none would give her<span class="hst">  </span>who than himself was weaker;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the tale of the mighty Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>far and near, was every man the speaker.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He bade that more than twenty<span class="hst">  </span>of those sent there be hung;</p>
			<p class="t0">None might wreak his anger,<span class="hst">  </span>though sore his heart was wrung.</p>
			<p class="t0">When all had done their errand,<span class="hst">  </span>for Hagen’s daughter suing,</p>
			<p class="t0">“Enough,” soon went the saying:<span class="hst">  </span>“’Twere best that none should go for her a-wooing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But still by high-born warriors<span class="hst">  </span>the maid was not unsought.</p>
			<p class="t0">Let pride be ne’er so lofty,<span class="hst">  </span>as we have long been taught,</p>
			<p class="t0">There always is another<span class="hst">  </span>with just as high a bearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">While to win her kindness<span class="hst">  </span>his yearning grows, and his toil he is never sparing.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c5">Tale the Fifth.<br/><span class="small">HOW WÂ-TE WAS SENT TO IRELAND AS A SUITOR.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel was lord in Daneland;<span class="hst">  </span>to be its king he rose;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas in the Sturmisch marches,<span class="hst">  </span>as many a one well knows;</p>
			<p class="t0">There abode his kindred,<span class="hst">  </span>who ways of honor taught him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortland also served him.<span class="hst">  </span>His might and worth high fame with all soon brought him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One among his kinsfolk<span class="hst">  </span>the name of Wâ-te bore;</p>
			<p class="t0">He for his lands and castles<span class="hst">  </span>fealty to Hettel swore.</p>
			<p class="t0">As kinsman of his master,<span class="hst">  </span>he careful teaching gave him</p>
			<p class="t0">In all things good and worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>and in his watchful care did ever have him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A landed knight in Daneland<span class="hst">  </span>was Wâ-te’s sister’s son,</p>
			<p class="t0">The brave and upright Horant.<span class="hst">  </span>Later his faith was shown</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto his lord, King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>who for his worth did crown him.</p>
			<p class="t0">This to him he grudged not,<span class="hst">  </span>but ever for a prince was glad to own him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel, rich and mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>at Hegeling held his seat,</p>
			<p class="t0">Not far from the lord of Ortland;<span class="hst">  </span>this is true, I weet.</p>
			<p class="t0">He there owned many castles,<span class="hst">  </span>eighty at least or over;</p>
			<p class="t0">They who these strongholds guarded<span class="hst">  </span>in truest faith and honor held them ever.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Lord he was of Friesland,<span class="hst">  </span>its waters and its land;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ditmarsh, as well as Waleis,<span class="hst">  </span>were swayed by his kingly hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel was truly mighty;<span class="hst">  </span>his kinsmen they were many;</p>
			<p class="t0">Bold was he and daring,<span class="hst">  </span>and ’gainst his foes he plotted, well as any.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel was an orphan,<span class="hst">  </span>and so he felt the need</p>
			<p class="t0">That he a wife should find him.<span class="hst">  </span>To him, at last, were dead</p>
			<p class="t0">Father as well as mother,<span class="hst">  </span>who their lands had left him.</p>
			<p class="t0">He friends in truth had many,<span class="hst">  </span>yet found he much in life that of bliss bereft him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The best of these besought him<span class="hst">  </span>some maiden’s love to seek,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who of his birth was worthy.<span class="hst">  </span>The knight did answer make:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I here know none who fitly<span class="hst">  </span>should be o’er the Hegelings seated,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor is there any lady<span class="hst">  </span>who, brought from far, should as my queen be greeted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake a knight of Nifland,<span class="hst">  </span>Morunc, a youthful lord:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I know of a lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>of whom I oft have heard;</p>
			<p class="t0">She in truth is fairer<span class="hst">  </span>than all on earth now living.</p>
			<p class="t0">Her will we gladly sue for,<span class="hst">  </span>that she her troth to you may soon be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then quoth the king: “Who is she?<span class="hst">  </span>her name I pray you tell.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said Morunc: “’Tis Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>in Ireland she doth dwell;</p>
			<p class="t0">Her father’s name is Hagen;<span class="hst">  </span>King Ger was her forefather.</p>
			<p class="t0">If to this land she cometh,<span class="hst">  </span>your life will then be blissful altogether.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the young King Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“I oft have heard it said,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoever woos this maiden<span class="hst">  </span>her father’s wrath must dread.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a worthy suitor<span class="hst">  </span>his life for her has ended;</p>
			<p class="t0">But none among my vassals<span class="hst">  </span>must meet his death for having me befriended.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Morunc quickly answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Then send to Horant’s land,</p>
			<p class="t0">And bid that he come hither;<span class="hst">  </span>he well doth understand</p>
			<p class="t0">The ways and moods of Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>for often has he seen them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless his help he gives you,<span class="hst">  </span>’twill come to nought, howe’er your friends demean them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “Your will I follow,<span class="hst">  </span>since she is so fair;</p>
			<p class="t0">But if my friends shall seek her,<span class="hst">  </span>yourself the suit must share;</p>
			<p class="t0">And if unto your friendship<span class="hst">  </span>the task I’ve trusted fitly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wealth shall you have and honor,<span class="hst">  </span>when as the Hegeling’s queen she’s greeted rightly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He quickly sent out riders<span class="hst">  </span>through the Danish land to haste;</p>
			<p class="t0">By them was the mighty Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>his nephew, found at last,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to the court was bidden;<span class="hst">  </span>to come must he be speedy,</p>
			<p class="t0">Within seven days, not later,<span class="hst">  </span>if he to help his lord in truth were ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Horant met the heralds,<span class="hst">  </span>and did their errand hear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then for friendly service<span class="hst">  </span>himself he would not spare.</p>
			<p class="t0">Right gladly did he listen<span class="hst">  </span>to the bidding of his master;</p>
			<p class="t0">But this, on a day thereafter,<span class="hst">  </span>to him brought sorrow great, and sore disaster.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the court he soon went riding,<span class="hst">  </span>with sixty of his men;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of friends at home young Horant<span class="hst">  </span>to take his leave was seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">He then made haste the faster,<span class="hst">  </span>when now the tale was told him</p>
			<p class="t0">How he must help his master,<span class="hst">  </span>if for a faithful knight he now would hold him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon the seventh morning<span class="hst">  </span>he came to Hettel’s land;</p>
			<p class="t0">Decked in finest clothing<span class="hst">  </span>was he and all his band.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king to welcome Horant<span class="hst">  </span>rode forth, most glad to greet him,</p>
			<p class="t0">And saw that with him Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>another Danish knight, was there to meet him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Good news it was of their coming,<span class="hst">  </span>of which all men now spoke;</p>
			<p class="t0">Glad was the king to see them;<span class="hst">  </span>from him a share it took</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the deep and heavy sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>which his heart was filling.</p>
			<p class="t0">“Welcome, Cousin Fru-te!”<span class="hst">  </span>cried he, the while he looked upon him smiling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Horant now with Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>before the king did stand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he asked for tidings<span class="hst">  </span>of their home in the Danish land.</p>
			<p class="t0">Both of them now answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Not many days are ended</p>
			<p class="t0">Since we in stormy battle<span class="hst">  </span>with many deadly blows our lives defended.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He asked whence they had ridden<span class="hst">  </span>from off the stormy field.</p>
			<p class="t0">They said: “It was from Portugal,<span class="hst">  </span>where the strife was held;</p>
			<p class="t0">There the mighty ruler<span class="hst">  </span>from fighting would not spare us;</p>
			<p class="t0">Daily within our borders<span class="hst">  </span>he did us wrong, and much ill-will did bear us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The young King Hettel answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now cast all care away;</p>
			<p class="t0">I know that the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>will never yield the sway</p>
			<p class="t0">He holds o’er the Sturmisch marches;<span class="hst">  </span>he of the land is owner;</p>
			<p class="t0">Who wins from him a castle<span class="hst">  </span>will earn high praise and long be held in honor.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Within the roomy palace<span class="hst">  </span>the guests then took their seats.</p>
			<p class="t0">Both Horant and Sir Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>with thoughtless, merry wits,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the loves of high-born ladies<span class="hst">  </span>began to gossip gaily.</p>
			<p class="t0">To them the young king listened,<span class="hst">  </span>and costly gifts he gave unto them freely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel turned to Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>and thus to ask began:</p>
			<p class="t0">“If aught hath reached your hearing,<span class="hst">  </span>then tell me, if you can,</p>
			<p class="t0">How ’tis with Lady Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>King Hagen’s lovely daughter?</p>
			<p class="t0">To her would I send most gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and would that words of love from me were brought her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The youthful knight then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“She is to me well known;</p>
			<p class="t0">A maid so fair and lovely<span class="hst">  </span>my eyes ne’er looked upon</p>
			<p class="t0">As she, that maid of Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>Hilda, the rich and stately,</p>
			<p class="t0">The daughter of wild Hagen;<span class="hst">  </span>to wear a crown with you would befit her greatly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On this King Hettel asked him:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now think you, can it be</p>
			<p class="t0">That ever her lordly father<span class="hst">  </span>will give this maid to me?</p>
			<p class="t0">If I deemed he were so friendly,<span class="hst">  </span>I would seek to win her,</p>
			<p class="t0">And would reward him ever<span class="hst">  </span>who gave to me his ready help to gain her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“That can never happen,”<span class="hst">  </span>to him young Horant said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“No rider with this errand<span class="hst">  </span>to Hagen need be sped.</p>
			<p class="t0">To hasten thither boldly<span class="hst">  </span>I feel, myself, no longing;</p>
			<p class="t0">The man sent there to seek her<span class="hst">  </span>is either slain with blows, or dies by hanging.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake again King Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“Not so for her I care;</p>
			<p class="t0">To hang my trusty vassal<span class="hst">  </span>should Hagen ever dare,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he, the king of Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>himself must death be facing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Be he ne’er so boastful,<span class="hst">  </span>he’ll find his rashness is to him no blessing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Fru-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“If Wâ-te deigns to go</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the king of Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>to woo this maid for you,</p>
			<p class="t0">Lucky will be our errand,<span class="hst">  </span>and we shall bring the lady;</p>
			<p class="t0">Or wounds throughout our bodies,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en to the heart, to take shall we be ready.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to him King Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“My men I now will send</p>
			<p class="t0">With word to the lord of Sturmland;<span class="hst">  </span>I do not fear the end,</p>
			<p class="t0">For Wâ-te will hasten gladly<span class="hst">  </span>wherever I shall bid him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bring Irold, too, from Friesland,<span class="hst">  </span>with all his men, for sorely do I need him.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His riders then went quickly<span class="hst">  </span>into the Sturmisch land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where the brave old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>they found among his band.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the word they gave him,<span class="hst">  </span>now to the king to betake him;</p>
			<p class="t0">But Wâ-te felt great wonder,<span class="hst">  </span>to know for what the Hegeling king did seek him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He asked if it were needful<span class="hst">  </span>to bring, when he should go,</p>
			<p class="t0">His breastplate and his helmet,<span class="hst">  </span>and any followers, too?</p>
			<p class="t0">One of the heralds answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“We did not hear it spoken</p>
			<p class="t0">That he had need of fighters;<span class="hst">  </span>for you alone did his words a wish betoken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te would be going,<span class="hst">  </span>but left behind a guard,</p>
			<p class="t0">To care for lands and castles.<span class="hst">  </span>Then taking horse, at his word,</p>
			<p class="t0">Twelve of his followers only<span class="hst">  </span>with him from home now started;</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, the brave old warrior,<span class="hst">  </span>at once on his way to court in haste departed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He reached the land of the Hegelings.<span class="hst">  </span>When he now was seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">As he came near Kampatille,<span class="hst">  </span>but little sorrow, I ween,</p>
			<p class="t0">Was felt by the kingly Hettel;<span class="hst">  </span>with speed he went to greet him,</p>
			<p class="t0">And thought of the kindly welcome<span class="hst">  </span>he would give his friend, old Wâ-te, when he met him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Right glad was he to see him;<span class="hst">  </span>with hearty speech he says:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Sir Wâ-te, thou art welcome;<span class="hst">  </span>many are the days</p>
			<p class="t0">Since I have looked upon you,<span class="hst">  </span>when on our horses sitting,</p>
			<p class="t0">Side by side together,<span class="hst">  </span>we proudly met our foes with blows befitting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered him old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Ever should good friends</p>
			<p class="t0">Be glad to be together;<span class="hst">  </span>that fight the better ends</p>
			<p class="t0">Where, before the foeman,<span class="hst">  </span>friends as one are fighting.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then by the hand he held him,<span class="hst">  </span>to him his love and friendship warmly plighting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They took their seats together,<span class="hst">  </span>nor place to other gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel, he was mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>and Wâ-te, he was brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">He yet was also haughty,<span class="hst">  </span>and proud in all his bearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel now was thinking<span class="hst">  </span>how Wâ-te could be brought to Ireland to be faring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“For this I bade thee come;</p>
			<p class="t0">Need have I of riders,<span class="hst">  </span>to send to Hagen’s home.</p>
			<p class="t0">Truly I know of no one<span class="hst">  </span>whom I would send the sooner</p>
			<p class="t0">Than thee, my good friend Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>or who in this could bring me greater honor.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Whatever I can do</p>
			<p class="t0">To show my love and fealty,<span class="hst">  </span>I’ll gladly do for you.</p>
			<p class="t0">Herein I may be trusted,<span class="hst">  </span>to be for you bold-hearted;</p>
			<p class="t0">And to bring about your wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>unless in this by death I should be thwarted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then quoth the kingly Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“Many friends have said</p>
			<p class="t0">That if the mighty Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>will my wooing heed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And give to me his daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>she, as my queen, would honor</p>
			<p class="t0">Me and my kingdom also;<span class="hst">  </span>my heart is bent as a wife and queen to own her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Angrily spoke Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Whoever this has said</p>
			<p class="t0">Would truly feel no sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>if I this day were dead.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Tis Fru-te, he of Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>I know it is no other,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who to this has stirred you,<span class="hst">  </span>to send me to the maid, your suit to further.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This young and lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>is guarded now with care;</p>
			<p class="t0">Horant and Fru-te also,<span class="hst">  </span>who say she is so fair,</p>
			<p class="t0">And speak to you her praises,<span class="hst">  </span>must go with me to seek her.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never shall I rest easy<span class="hst">  </span>unless they strive with me your own to make her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Both these faithful vassals<span class="hst">  </span>King Hettel sent for soon;</p>
			<p class="t0">To others good and trusty<span class="hst">  </span>they also made it known,</p>
			<p class="t0">That by their king and master<span class="hst">  </span>they at court were wanted.</p>
			<p class="t0">No more their thoughts men whispered,<span class="hst">  </span>but freely spoke of the coming raid, undaunted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Wâ-te, the brave old warrior,<span class="hst">  </span>did on Horant look,</p>
			<p class="t0">And on the Danish Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>how sharply then he spoke!</p>
			<p class="t0">“Brave knights, may God reward you,<span class="hst">  </span>to me you are so friendly,</p>
			<p class="t0">And of my fame so careful,<span class="hst">  </span>and my trip to court this time you help so kindly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“You are, forsooth, most willing<span class="hst">  </span>that I this errand do;</p>
			<p class="t0">But both of you are bounden<span class="hst">  </span>with me thereon to go,</p>
			<p class="t0">To serve the king, our master,<span class="hst">  </span>even as our duty calleth.</p>
			<p class="t0">He who my life endangers<span class="hst">  </span>himself the risk must share, whate’er befalleth.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“For this I now am ready,”<span class="hst">  </span>answered Horant the Dane;</p>
			<p class="t0">“If leave the king will grant us,<span class="hst">  </span>I then will shun no pain,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor aught of toil will grudge me.<span class="hst">  </span>Only to see this lady,</p>
			<p class="t0">For me and for my kinsman,<span class="hst">  </span>were happiness enough, and bliss already.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Then we ought,” said Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>“to take upon our way</p>
			<p class="t0">Seven hundred warriors.<span class="hst">  </span>No man doth honor pay</p>
			<p class="t0">To Hagen without grudging.<span class="hst">  </span>He is overweening, truly;</p>
			<p class="t0">If he thinks that he can crush us,<span class="hst">  </span>he soon must lay aside his boasting wholly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Sir king, you should bid your workmen<span class="hst">  </span>a ship of cypress-wood</p>
			<p class="t0">To build upon the river;<span class="hst">  </span>strong must it be and good,</p>
			<p class="t0">So your band of warriors<span class="hst">  </span>shall shipwreck ne’er be ruing.</p>
			<p class="t0">From timber white as silver<span class="hst">  </span>the lofty masts your men must soon be hewing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Also food for your fighters<span class="hst">  </span>you must now bespeak;</p>
			<p class="t0">And bid that men be busy<span class="hst">  </span>helmets for us to make,</p>
			<p class="t0">And hauberks strong for many;<span class="hst">  </span>when we these are wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then wild Hagen’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>we shall the easier win by craft and daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Also my nephew Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>who is shrewd and wise,</p>
			<p class="t0">Must go with us as a shopman;<span class="hst">  </span>(I grudge him not his guise)</p>
			<p class="t0">There must he to the ladies<span class="hst">  </span>be clasps and arm-bands selling,</p>
			<p class="t0">With gold and costly jewels;<span class="hst">  </span>thus greater trust in us will they be feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“For sale we also must carry<span class="hst">  </span>weapons and clothing, too;</p>
			<p class="t0">And since wild Hagen’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>it is such risk to woo,</p>
			<p class="t0">That only now by fighting<span class="hst">  </span>one can hope to wed her,</p>
			<p class="t0">Let Wâ-te choose the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>to go with him, and home to the king to lead her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“A shop I cannot keep;</p>
			<p class="t0">Not often doth my money<span class="hst">  </span>in coffers idly sleep;</p>
			<p class="t0">My lot I’ve shared with fighters,<span class="hst">  </span>and that I still am doing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Therein I am not skilful,<span class="hst">  </span>that I to ladies gew-gaws should be showing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“But since my nephew Horant<span class="hst">  </span>on me this task has laid,</p>
			<p class="t0">He knows full well that Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>will never yield the maid:</p>
			<p class="t0">He prides himself on owning<span class="hst">  </span>the strength of six and twenty;</p>
			<p class="t0">If he shall learn of our wooing,<span class="hst">  </span>our hope to leave his land will be but scanty.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Good king, now let us hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>but bid that first our hull</p>
			<p class="t0">With a deck of deal be covered;<span class="hst">  </span>let it, below, be full</p>
			<p class="t0">Of knights both strong and doughty,<span class="hst">  </span>who shall help be giving,</p>
			<p class="t0">If ever the wild King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>forbids that we shall leave his kingdom, living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Of these brave knights a hundred,<span class="hst">  </span>with outfits good for war,</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the land of Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>we in our ships must bear;</p>
			<p class="t0">There shall my nephew Horant<span class="hst">  </span>in his shop be seated,</p>
			<p class="t0">Keeping two hundred near him; thus shall the ladies’ coming be awaited.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Your men must also build us<span class="hst">  </span>barges strong and wide,</p>
			<p class="t0">To carry food and horses,<span class="hst">  </span>and to sail our ships beside:</p>
			<p class="t0">Enough for a year or longer<span class="hst">  </span>we must take to feed us;</p>
			<p class="t0">And we will say to Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>that to leave our land King Hettel did forbid us,</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“And that our lord and master<span class="hst">  </span>great wrong to us hath wrought.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then with our gifts so costly<span class="hst">  </span>we often shall be brought</p>
			<p class="t0">To Hagen and to Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>where they their court are keeping;</p>
			<p class="t0">Our gifts shall make us welcome,<span class="hst">  </span>and kindness from the king shall we be reaping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“We then the tale will tell him,<span class="hst">  </span>we wretched outlaws are;</p>
			<p class="t0">And thus at once the pity<span class="hst">  </span>of Hagen we shall share.</p>
			<p class="t0">To us, poor homeless wanderers,<span class="hst">  </span>shelter will be granted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And in his land King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>thenceforth will see that nought by us is wanted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel asked his warriors:<span class="hst">  </span>“My friends, I pray you tell,</p>
			<p class="t0">Since you to go are willing,<span class="hst">  </span>how soon you hence will sail?”</p>
			<p class="t0">“So soon as comes the summer,<span class="hst">  </span>and May with gladsome weather,”</p>
			<p class="t0">They said, “we shall be ready,<span class="hst">  </span>and, riding again to court, will we come hither.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Meanwhile must men be making<span class="hst">  </span>whatever we shall need,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Sails and also rudders,<span class="hst">  </span>well-made, and that with speed,</p>
			<p class="t0">Barges wide, and galleys,<span class="hst">  </span>to bear us to our haven;</p>
			<p class="t0">So the swell of the waters<span class="hst">  </span>shall stir us not, nor make us sick or craven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">King Hettel said: “Ride quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>now, to your land and home.</p>
			<p class="t0">For horses and for clothing<span class="hst">  </span>no cost to you shall come;</p>
			<p class="t0">For you and all your followers<span class="hst">  </span>such outfit shall be ready,</p>
			<p class="t0">That you no shame shall suffer,<span class="hst">  </span>whenever you are seen by any lady.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he his leave had taken,<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te to Sturmland rode;</p>
			<p class="t0">Horant and with him Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>followed in hurried mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">Back to the land of Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>where they held the lordship.</p>
			<p class="t0">To help their master Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>they thought could never be to them a hardship.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then, in his home, King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>let his will be known;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of shipwrights and of workmen<span class="hst">  </span>idle was not one.</p>
			<p class="t0">While the ships were building<span class="hst">  </span>to do their best they hastened;</p>
			<p class="t0">The beams that met together,<span class="hst">  </span>were with bands of silver strongly fastened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All the spars and mast-trees,<span class="hst">  </span>they were strong and good;</p>
			<p class="t0">Red gold, and brightly shining,<span class="hst">  </span>was laid on the rudder-wood,</p>
			<p class="t0">And like to fire was glowing:<span class="hst">  </span>wealth their master blesses.</p>
			<p class="t0">When time it was for leaving,<span class="hst">  </span>the men their tasks had done, and won high praises.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The ropes that held the anchors<span class="hst">  </span>came from a far-off strand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Brought from the shores of Araby;<span class="hst">  </span>never on sea or land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before that day or after,<span class="hst">  </span>had any man seen better:</p>
			<p class="t0">So might the men of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>easier make their way o’er the deep sea-water.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They who the sails were making<span class="hst">  </span>worked late, and early rose;</p>
			<p class="t0">For the king had bid them hurry.<span class="hst">  </span>For making these they chose</p>
			<p class="t0">Silken stuff from Abalie,<span class="hst">  </span>as good as could be brought them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Truly far from idle<span class="hst">  </span>were, in those days, the busy hands that wrought them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Can any one believe it?<span class="hst">  </span>They had the anchors made</p>
			<p class="t0">Of purest beaten silver.<span class="hst">  </span>The heart of the king was led</p>
			<p class="t0">Strongly now to wooing;<span class="hst">  </span>no rest would he be knowing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor of his men was sparing,<span class="hst">  </span>until the day when they should thence be going.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Well-framed, with heavy planking,<span class="hst">  </span>now the ships were seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Sound ’gainst war and weather.<span class="hst">  </span>Then word was sent to the men,</p>
			<p class="t0">That to seek the lovely lady<span class="hst">  </span>they must soon be faring.</p>
			<p class="t0">This was told to no one<span class="hst">  </span>but those who the trust of the king were rightly sharing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te to meet King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>from Sturmland held his course;</p>
			<p class="t0">With silver gear and housing,<span class="hst">  </span>heavily went his horse.</p>
			<p class="t0">To court went, too, his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>four hundred men undaunted;</p>
			<p class="t0">And now the doughty Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>brave knights enough, for guests, no longer wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Morunc, the brave and daring,<span class="hst">  </span>from Friesland thither went,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with him brought two hundred.<span class="hst">  </span>Word to the king was sent</p>
			<p class="t0">That now, with helms and breastplates,<span class="hst">  </span>they were thither riding;</p>
			<p class="t0">In haste came Irold also;<span class="hst">  </span>thus gladly Hettel’s kinsmen did his bidding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thither rode from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>Horant young and brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel to do his errand<span class="hst">  </span>did trusty liegemen have;</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand men or over<span class="hst">  </span>might he for this be sending;</p>
			<p class="t0">Only a prince so mighty<span class="hst">  </span>of such a task had ever made an ending.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold, too, of Ortland,<span class="hst">  </span>was ready now to go:</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en though on him King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>should never clothes bestow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet, for himself and his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>he had of these so many,</p>
			<p class="t0">That wheresoe’er they were going,<span class="hst">  </span>they never need to beg for aught from any.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king, as well beseemed him,<span class="hst">  </span>greeted all the band;</p>
			<p class="t0">First, his liegeman Irold<span class="hst">  </span>he kindly took by the hand;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he turned to Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>to where he found him seated:</p>
			<p class="t0">At last, his hardy warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>ready to leave the land, his word awaited.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To all it now was bidden<span class="hst">  </span>that they should give good heed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And everything make ready<span class="hst">  </span>that knights could ever need.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now were seen by the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>the ships so fair and stately;</p>
			<p class="t0">To woo the lovely Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>the king in all things showed his forethought greatly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Two new and well-made galleys<span class="hst">  </span>they had upon the flood,</p>
			<p class="t0">With two broad ships of burden;<span class="hst">  </span>both were strong and good.</p>
			<p class="t0">A ship of state went with them;<span class="hst">  </span>than this had ne’er a better,</p>
			<p class="t0">By any friend or foeman,<span class="hst">  </span>on the shores of any land, been seen upon the water.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To start they now are willing;<span class="hst">  </span>already on the ships</p>
			<p class="t0">Were the clothes and horses loaded.<span class="hst">  </span>Then from Wâ-te’s lips</p>
			<p class="t0">Came kindly words to Hettel;<span class="hst">  </span>he begged him to feel easy,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till they should again be coming,<span class="hst">  </span>for to do his bidding they would all be busy.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king to him said mournfully:<span class="hst">  </span>“I give into your care</p>
			<p class="t0">The knights, untaught and youthful,<span class="hst">  </span>who such risks will dare,</p>
			<p class="t0">With you upon this errand:<span class="hst">  </span>most earnestly I pray you</p>
			<p class="t0">That, for your honor, daily<span class="hst">  </span>you teach these youths with care, and make them to obey you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Him thus Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To that give not a thought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Keep a brave heart, I beg you,<span class="hst">  </span>that here at home, in nought</p>
			<p class="t0">You fail of being steadfast,<span class="hst">  </span>where’er your honor reaches:</p>
			<p class="t0">Watch well, too, o’er our holdings:<span class="hst">  </span>these youths shall learn from me what wisdom teaches.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The good and trusty Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>the wealth of the king did guard,—</p>
			<p class="t0">The gold and costly jewels,<span class="hst">  </span>and of many things a hoard.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king was free in spending<span class="hst">  </span>whatsoe’er was wanted;</p>
			<p class="t0">If Fru-te aught did ask for,<span class="hst">  </span>thirty-fold to him he gladly granted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A hundred men were chosen,<span class="hst">  </span>and now within the ship,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wherein to woo the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>his friends must cross the deep,</p>
			<p class="t0">All craftily were hidden,<span class="hst">  </span>to help them, if ’twere needful.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gifts both rich and worthy<span class="hst">  </span>the king to give these faithful men was heedful.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With these, among the followers,<span class="hst">  </span>every rank was seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of knights and squires also,<span class="hst">  </span>thirty hundred men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who, for toil and struggle,<span class="hst">  </span>from far-off lands came riding.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the king to his lieges:<span class="hst">  </span>“May God in heaven to you give careful guiding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him thus Horant answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“From fear now be you free;</p>
			<p class="t0">When you shall see us coming,<span class="hst">  </span>you then with us will see</p>
			<p class="t0">A maid so fair and lovely,<span class="hst">  </span>you well may wish to greet her.”</p>
			<p class="t0">This the king heard gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>but far was the day when he at last should meet her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They took their leave with kisses,<span class="hst">  </span>the king and many a guest;</p>
			<p class="t0">For these the king was feeling<span class="hst">  </span>wearisome unrest.</p>
			<p class="t0">While they for him are toiling,<span class="hst">  </span>each hour he fear must borrow;</p>
			<p class="t0">He forsooth was downcast,<span class="hst">  </span>and nought could cheer him, in his mood of sorrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">This was for his welfare,<span class="hst">  </span>that a wind from out the north</p>
			<p class="t0">Now their sails was swelling,<span class="hst">  </span>and briskly helped them forth.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ships were wafted evenly,<span class="hst">  </span>as they from land were turning;</p>
			<p class="t0">But hardships they had known not<span class="hst">  </span>the youths, upon their way, erelong were learning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The truth we cannot tell you,<span class="hst">  </span>nor can it e’en be guessed,</p>
			<p class="t0">For nights full six and thirty<span class="hst">  </span>what lodgings gave them rest,</p>
			<p class="t0">While upon the water.<span class="hst">  </span>The youths they with them carried,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bound by oaths of fealty,<span class="hst">  </span>swore again to keep them, where’er they tarried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">However willing were they<span class="hst">  </span>to sail on the tossing sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet sometimes it befell them<span class="hst">  </span>in great unrest to be.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ease they took but seldom,<span class="hst">  </span>as the waves would spare it;</p>
			<p class="t0">But he who ploughs the waters<span class="hst">  </span>pain must often feel, and yet must bear it.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After the waves had borne them<span class="hst">  </span>full a thousand miles,</p>
			<p class="t0">They came to Hagen’s castle,<span class="hst">  </span>where, as was said erewhiles,</p>
			<p class="t0">He, the master of Ballian,<span class="hst">  </span>shamefully had lorded:</p>
			<p class="t0">This was a wicked falsehood,<span class="hst">  </span>the deeds were never done as the tale was worded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the men from Hegeling<span class="hst">  </span>over the sea had gone,</p>
			<p class="t0">And neared wild Hagen’s castle,<span class="hst">  </span>their coming soon was known;</p>
			<p class="t0">Much the folk there wondered<span class="hst">  </span>from what far kingdom sailing</p>
			<p class="t0">The waves had borne them thither;<span class="hst">  </span>how finely they were clad all men were telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First the ship with an anchor<span class="hst">  </span>was fastened on the strand;</p>
			<p class="t0">To furl the sails then quickly<span class="hst">  </span>each gave a ready hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">It was not long thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>before the news was bruited,</p>
			<p class="t0">Throughout King Hagen’s castle,<span class="hst">  </span>that ships, with unknown men, in his harbor floated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now on the shore they landed,<span class="hst">  </span>and did their goods unlade;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever could be wanted<span class="hst">  </span>on the sands, for sale, they spread,</p>
			<p class="t0">And all that any asked for.<span class="hst">  </span>In wealth they were not lacking;</p>
			<p class="t0">But tho’ their men had silver,<span class="hst">  </span>’twas little that they bought, or for themselves were taking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Clothed in the garb of tradesmen,<span class="hst">  </span>on the shore did stand</p>
			<p class="t0">Sixty men or over,<span class="hst">  </span>well-dight, a goodly band.</p>
			<p class="t0">Fru-te, the lord of Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>was busy as their leader;</p>
			<p class="t0">His clothing was far better<span class="hst">  </span>than there was worn by any other trader.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The worthy lord and master<span class="hst">  </span>over Ballian town,</p>
			<p class="t0">When he heard of their coming,<span class="hst">  </span>and the riches they did own,</p>
			<p class="t0">Rode down with many followers<span class="hst">  </span>to where those crafty sellers</p>
			<p class="t0">He found, himself awaiting.<span class="hst">  </span>Kind was the mien of all who there were dwellers.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First the master asked them:<span class="hst">  </span>“Whence their way they had made,</p>
			<p class="t0">And over the sea come thither?”<span class="hst">  </span>To him then Fru-te said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“God have you in his keeping;<span class="hst">  </span>we from afar are sailing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Tradesmen truly are we;<span class="hst">  </span>our masters rich, near by, in ships are dwelling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Let peace with us be plighted,”<span class="hst">  </span>old Wâ-te then began;</p>
			<p class="t0">But from the master’s grimness,<span class="hst">  </span>the truth to see was plain,</p>
			<p class="t0">That, where he was the ruler,<span class="hst">  </span>stern and harsh was his bearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Straightway then to Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>they led the guests, who with their tale were faring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen said, as he met them:<span class="hst">  </span>“Safeguard to you I give;</p>
			<p class="t0">My peace I pledge you willingly.<span class="hst">  </span>He shall no longer live,</p>
			<p class="t0">But hang upon the gallows,<span class="hst">  </span>who these guests shall harry:</p>
			<p class="t0">Let them not be fearful;<span class="hst">  </span>them shall nothing harm while in my land they tarry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Rich and costly jewels<span class="hst">  </span>they to Hagen gave,</p>
			<p class="t0">In worth, of marks a thousand.<span class="hst">  </span>From them he nought did crave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor even so much as a penny;<span class="hst">  </span>but what for sale they offered</p>
			<p class="t0">He begged of them to show him,<span class="hst">  </span>such as to knights and ladies might be proffered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For all he thanked them warmly;<span class="hst">  </span>he said: “If I should live</p>
			<p class="t0">Not more than three days longer,<span class="hst">  </span>for all that now they give</p>
			<p class="t0">My guests shall be rewarded.<span class="hst">  </span>If my liegeman do not heed me,</p>
			<p class="t0">And these for aught be lacking,<span class="hst">  </span>all shall then for this with right upbraid me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the gifts they gave him<span class="hst">  </span>the king with his men did share;</p>
			<p class="t0">Among them there were necklaces,<span class="hst">  </span>fit for ladies fair,</p>
			<p class="t0">With finger-rings and arm-bands,<span class="hst">  </span>as well as ribands dainty,</p>
			<p class="t0">And head-gear, to bedeck them:<span class="hst">  </span>these the king to many gave in plenty.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His wife and lovely daughter<span class="hst">  </span>now most rightly thought</p>
			<p class="t0">That never to their kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>had gifts for them been brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">That were so rare and costly,<span class="hst">  </span>by sellers or by traders.</p>
			<p class="t0">Horant and Wâ-te also<span class="hst">  </span>in sending gifts to court were now the leaders.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Sixty silken garments,<span class="hst">  </span>the best that e’er were sold,</p>
			<p class="t0">Up to the shore were carried,<span class="hst">  </span>and forty wrought with gold.</p>
			<p class="t0">They would have prized but lightly<span class="hst">  </span>cloths from Bagdad even;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of linen suits a hundred,<span class="hst">  </span>the best they had, now to the king were given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Beside the handsome clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>made of silken stuff,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of richest inner garments<span class="hst">  </span>they also gave enough;</p>
			<p class="t0">There might perhaps be forty,<span class="hst">  </span>or more, if reckoned fully;</p>
			<p class="t0">Could ever man buy praises,<span class="hst">  </span>they by their costly gifts had gained them truly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Twelve Castilian horses,<span class="hst">  </span>all saddled, were brought, I trow;</p>
			<p class="t0">Also many breastplates,<span class="hst">  </span>and well-made helmets, too,</p>
			<p class="t0">Men were bidden to carry;<span class="hst">  </span>twelve bucklers likewise bore they,</p>
			<p class="t0">Rimmed with golden edges.<span class="hst">  </span>Kind were Hagen’s guests; free givers were they.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then, too, with gifts came riding<span class="hst">  </span>Horant the brave and bold;</p>
			<p class="t0">Irold the strong came with him;<span class="hst">  </span>this to the king was told:</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas said to him, moreover,<span class="hst">  </span>that those now thither faring</p>
			<p class="t0">Of lands were the lords and owners.<span class="hst">  </span>This might well be seen by the gifts they were bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After these came riding<span class="hst">  </span>four and twenty men</p>
			<p class="t0">Whom they were thither leading,<span class="hst">  </span>well-bred were they, I ween;</p>
			<p class="t0">Such also was their clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>they seemed as if well fitted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now in truth were coming,<span class="hst">  </span>that very day to be by Hagen knighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then unto King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>one of his friends thus spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“The gifts the men now bring you<span class="hst">  </span>’tis best you deign to take:</p>
			<p class="t0">Never must you leave them<span class="hst">  </span>unthanked for all their treasure.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen lacked not riches,<span class="hst">  </span>but yet his thanks he gave them without measure.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “I thank you kindly,<span class="hst">  </span>as I of right should do.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he bade that his stewards<span class="hst">  </span>to see the gifts should go;</p>
			<p class="t0">And also that the clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>piece by piece, be shown them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Glad were they to see them,<span class="hst">  </span>and wondered greatly as they gazed upon them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said one of the stewards:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hear now the truth I tell:</p>
			<p class="t0">Chests there are of silver,<span class="hst">  </span>and filled with gold as well,</p>
			<p class="t0">With many costly jewels,<span class="hst">  </span>rich and kingly even:</p>
			<p class="t0">Marks fully twenty thousand<span class="hst">  </span>the goods are worth, which they to you have given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the king thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Blessings on my guests!</p>
			<p class="t0">I now will share with others<span class="hst">  </span>the riches in these chests.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to his knights was given<span class="hst">  </span>whate’er of these they wanted;</p>
			<p class="t0">To every one among them<span class="hst">  </span>all that he might wish by the king was granted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king now seated near him<span class="hst">  </span>both the two young men,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Irold and also Horant;<span class="hst">  </span>he began to ask them then,</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whence to his kingdom sailing,<span class="hst">  </span>they to come had striven?</p>
			<p class="t0">Gifts so rich and worthy<span class="hst">  </span>have ne’er before by guests to me been given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Horant:<span class="hst">  </span>“This shall you know full well;</p>
			<p class="t0">My lord, now hear us kindly<span class="hst">  </span>while we our sorrows tell.</p>
			<p class="t0">Outlawed wanderers are we,<span class="hst">  </span>and from our homes were driven;</p>
			<p class="t0">A king most rich and mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>to wreak his anger, woe to us hath given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake again wild Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“What may be his name,</p>
			<p class="t0">From whose rich kingdom driven,<span class="hst">  </span>outcasts you became?</p>
			<p class="t0">You of wealth are owners,<span class="hst">  </span>and, if not by his wits forsaken,</p>
			<p class="t0">To keep such worthy lieges<span class="hst">  </span>within his land he would some pains have taken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He asked “Who them had outlawed,<span class="hst">  </span>and what name he bore?</p>
			<p class="t0">Of what misdoings guilty,<span class="hst">  </span>had they to this far shore</p>
			<p class="t0">Made their flight in sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>to ask the help of strangers?”</p>
			<p class="t0">To him then answered Horant:<span class="hst">  </span>“To you will we make known our woes and dangers.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“He bears the name of ‘Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>Lord of the Hegeling land’;</p>
			<p class="t0">Brave and mighty is he,<span class="hst">  </span>and sways with a heavy hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">We of all our happiness<span class="hst">  </span>have been robbed and plundered;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of right are we embittered,<span class="hst">  </span>since from our land and home we now are sundered.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him spoke Hagen kindly:<span class="hst">  </span>“This to your good shall turn;</p>
			<p class="t0">I will in full repay you<span class="hst">  </span>the losses that you mourn.</p>
			<p class="t0">If I make myself a beggar,<span class="hst">  </span>by thus so freely giving,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet from the king of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>you need not ask for help while I am living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If you, good knights,” he added,<span class="hst">  </span>“here with me will stay,</p>
			<p class="t0">With you will I share right gladly<span class="hst">  </span>the lands I own to-day;</p>
			<p class="t0">Such guerdon by King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>ne’er to you was given.</p>
			<p class="t0">The wealth from you he has taken,<span class="hst">  </span>that give I you, and more by tenfold even.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“To stay with you we are ready,”<span class="hst">  </span>then said Horant the Dane,</p>
			<p class="t0">“But we fear that when King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>shall learn that we were seen</p>
			<p class="t0">Within the Irish borders,<span class="hst">  </span>he will find a way to reach us;</p>
			<p class="t0">And I am ever dreading<span class="hst">  </span>that we can nowhere live, and this he’ll teach us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the band of wanderers<span class="hst">  </span>the lordly Hagen said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Do what now I bid you,<span class="hst">  </span>and a home for you is made.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never will King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>dare for your harm to seek you</p>
			<p class="t0">Within my land and kingdom;<span class="hst">  </span>it were a wrong to me from hence to take you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He bade they should be sheltered,<span class="hst">  </span>at once, within his town;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to his men and lieges<span class="hst">  </span>he made his wishes known,</p>
			<p class="t0">That now unto the wanderers<span class="hst">  </span>all honor should be granted.</p>
			<p class="t0">The water-weary sailors<span class="hst">  </span>soon found the rest that they so long had wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the townsmen freely<span class="hst">  </span>did the king’s behest;</p>
			<p class="t0">To do it they were ready:<span class="hst">  </span>houses, the very best,</p>
			<p class="t0">Forty, or even over,<span class="hst">  </span>were empty left, to be taken</p>
			<p class="t0">By the Danish sailors;<span class="hst">  </span>their homes, by the king’s good lieges were willingly forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Up on the beach were carried<span class="hst">  </span>the wares, full many a pile,</p>
			<p class="t0">That in the ships lay hidden.<span class="hst">  </span>Their owners thought, the while,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they would rather struggle<span class="hst">  </span>with storms upon the water,</p>
			<p class="t0">Than to seek their luck and welfare<span class="hst">  </span>in wooing Hilda, Hagen’s lovely daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen bade his followers:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now ask these guests of mine</p>
			<p class="t0">If they will deign most kindly<span class="hst">  </span>to eat my bread and wine,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till they, within my kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>on lands they hold are living.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The Danish Fru-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To take your food would shame to us be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If erst the great King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>had been to us so good,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he both gold and silver<span class="hst">  </span>would give to us for food,</p>
			<p class="t0">We in our houses had them,<span class="hst">  </span>and might of them be wasteful;</p>
			<p class="t0">We e’en could stay our hunger,<span class="hst">  </span>and feed thereon, if this to us were tasteful.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">’Twas bidden then by Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>that his booth should be set up.</p>
			<p class="t0">To see for sale such riches<span class="hst">  </span>men ne’er again could hope.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never within their borders<span class="hst">  </span>did any trader offer</p>
			<p class="t0">Fine goods at such a bargain;<span class="hst">  </span>they easily were sold before the day was over.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All could buy who wished them,<span class="hst">  </span>gold and jewels rare.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king, by greatest kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>was to his guests made dear.</p>
			<p class="t0">If any, without buying,<span class="hst">  </span>still these treasures wanted,</p>
			<p class="t0">The traders were so friendly<span class="hst">  </span>that they, as gifts, the goods to many granted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whate’er of Wâ-te or Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>was said by any one,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all the deeds of kindness<span class="hst">  </span>that here by them were done,—</p>
			<p class="t0">The tale might not be trusted,<span class="hst">  </span>how they for these were ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">They strove to gain high praises,<span class="hst">  </span>and this at court was told to many a lady.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of the poor nor man nor woman<span class="hst">  </span>for clothes was seen to lack;</p>
			<p class="t0">To those in need among them<span class="hst">  </span>they gave their pledges back,</p>
			<p class="t0">And from debt they freed them.<span class="hst">  </span>To the princess, morn and even,</p>
			<p class="t0">Oft by her faithful steward<span class="hst">  </span>the tale of these guests from far was truly given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the king she made her prayer:<span class="hst">  </span>“Dearest father mine,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ask that these guests so worthy<span class="hst">  </span>to ride to court will deign.</p>
			<p class="t0">They say that one among them<span class="hst">  </span>hath charms beyond all measure;</p>
			<p class="t0">Should he to your bidding listen,<span class="hst">  </span>the sight of him ofttimes would give me pleasure.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her the king thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That shall quickly be;</p>
			<p class="t0">His well-bred ways and bearing<span class="hst">  </span>I soon will let you see.”</p>
			<p class="t0">But still the great King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>never yet had known him;</p>
			<p class="t0">Long the ladies waited<span class="hst">  </span>till Wâ-te came, and they could look upon him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Word to the guests was carried;<span class="hst">  </span>to them ’twas kindly said,</p>
			<p class="t0">That if it e’er should happen<span class="hst">  </span>that they of aught had need,</p>
			<p class="t0">They should to the king betake them,<span class="hst">  </span>and his food be sharing.</p>
			<p class="t0">To Fru-te this was pleasing,<span class="hst">  </span>for wise he was, not less than he was daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those who came from Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>when at court, took care</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever to be blameless<span class="hst">  </span>for the clothes that they should wear:</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas so with the men of Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>from Sturmland thither faring,</p>
			<p class="t0">And than himself no sword-knight<span class="hst">  </span>in any land could show a finer bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those who came with Morunc<span class="hst">  </span>wore mantles over all,</p>
			<p class="t0">With robes from far Kampalia.<span class="hst">  </span>Fiery red, as a coal,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gold and gems that sparkled<span class="hst">  </span>on their clothes were shining.</p>
			<p class="t0">Irold, the daring champion,<span class="hst">  </span>came not alone, young Hilda bent on winning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thither came brave Horant;<span class="hst">  </span>all others he out-vied</p>
			<p class="t0">In rich and costly clothing.<span class="hst">  </span>With mantles long and wide,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gay in hue and gaudy,<span class="hst">  </span>his men were decked out brightly:</p>
			<p class="t0">Those brave men from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>proudly came, and had a look most knightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Tho’ Hagen’s birth was kingly,<span class="hst">  </span>and lordly was his mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">He yet went forth to meet them.<span class="hst">  </span>His daughter, fair and good,</p>
			<p class="t0">Rose up before old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>from where she now was seated.</p>
			<p class="t0">Such was Wâ-te’s bearing<span class="hst">  </span>as if with smiles his friends he never greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said, in way most seemly:<span class="hst">  </span>“Welcome to you I give;</p>
			<p class="t0">Both I and the king, my father,<span class="hst">  </span>must from your looks believe</p>
			<p class="t0">That you are weary warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>and sorely have been fighting.</p>
			<p class="t0">Good-will the king will show you,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon his faith to you will he be plighting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her they all bent lowly;<span class="hst">  </span>their ways, they were well-bred.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king then bade to be seated,<span class="hst">  </span>as hosts are wont to bid.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of drink to them was given,<span class="hst">  </span>wine the best and rarest;</p>
			<p class="t0">Better ne’er was tasted<span class="hst">  </span>in the home of any lord, albeit the fairest.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In talk and fun and merriment<span class="hst">  </span>seated were they all.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon the queenly maiden<span class="hst">  </span>was seen to leave the hall:</p>
			<p class="t0">But first she begged her father<span class="hst">  </span>the kindness now to show her</p>
			<p class="t0">To bid the knights so worthy<span class="hst">  </span>to come to her, for pastime, to her bower.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Her wish the king then granted,<span class="hst">  </span>(so to us, ’tis said);</p>
			<p class="t0">His young and lovely daughter<span class="hst">  </span>at this was truly glad.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon fair clothes and jewels<span class="hst">  </span>the maidens all were wearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">And earnestly were watching<span class="hst">  </span>the many knights from far, to see their bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the elder Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>sat by her daughter fair,</p>
			<p class="t0">Each one of her lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>demeaned herself with care;</p>
			<p class="t0">So that all who saw her<span class="hst">  </span>high in breeding thought her,</p>
			<p class="t0">And nothing else could say of her,<span class="hst">  </span>but that she was indeed a king’s fair daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now bade they that old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>should to the maids be brought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Though he was gray and aged,<span class="hst">  </span>none the less they thought,</p>
			<p class="t0">To guard against his wooing,<span class="hst">  </span>they must as children meet him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>stepped forth the youthful queen, right glad to greet him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She was the first to do so,<span class="hst">  </span>but wished she might be spared</p>
			<p class="t0">When she now must kiss him:<span class="hst">  </span>broad and gray was his beard,</p>
			<p class="t0">And the hair of the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>with golden strings was braided.</p>
			<p class="t0">He and the Danish Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>the queen’s behest to seat them slowly heeded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Both the well-clad heroes<span class="hst">  </span>before their seats now stood;</p>
			<p class="t0">Well they knew fine breeding,<span class="hst">  </span>and made their teaching good.</p>
			<p class="t0">In many a bitter struggle,<span class="hst">  </span>in their manhood early,</p>
			<p class="t0">They gained a name as warriors;<span class="hst">  </span>and men to them gave praises for it fairly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda and her daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>in lively, merry mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">Began to ask of Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>whether he thought it good,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus with lovely ladies<span class="hst">  </span>to sit in ease and pleasure,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or if to him ’twere better<span class="hst">  </span>his strength in stormy fight with foes to measure?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The aged Wâ-te answered: “To me the last seems best;</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ among fair ladies<span class="hst">  </span>glad am I to rest,</p>
			<p class="t0">Never am I happier<span class="hst">  </span>than when with knights most daring,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wherever that may happen,<span class="hst">  </span>upon the stormy field the fight I am sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At this the gay young maiden<span class="hst">  </span>broke into laughter loud;</p>
			<p class="t0">Well she saw, with ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>his stern, uneasy mood.</p>
			<p class="t0">With this in the halls yet longer<span class="hst">  </span>were the maidens merry;</p>
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda and her daughter<span class="hst">  </span>to talk with Morunc’s knights were never weary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She asked about old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Say, by what name is he known?</p>
			<p class="t0">Has he any liegemen?<span class="hst">  </span>Doth he lands and castles own?</p>
			<p class="t0">Has he a wife and children<span class="hst">  </span>in the land whence he is roving?</p>
			<p class="t0">There, as I am thinking,<span class="hst">  </span>at his home and hearth, there must be little loving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered one of the warriors:<span class="hst">  </span>“Both children and a wife</p>
			<p class="t0">In his home and land await him.<span class="hst">  </span>His riches and his life</p>
			<p class="t0">He risketh for his duty;<span class="hst">  </span>a hero brave he has shown him.</p>
			<p class="t0">A bold and daring champion,<span class="hst">  </span>throughout his life, both friend and foe have known him.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold the tale was telling<span class="hst">  </span>about this fearless knight,</p>
			<p class="t0">That never worthier liegeman,<span class="hst">  </span>or bolder man in fight,</p>
			<p class="t0">A king need e’er be seeking,<span class="hst">  </span>his lands and castles over:</p>
			<p class="t0">Though mildly now he bears him,<span class="hst">  </span>there ne’er was found a stronger or a braver.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The queen then said to Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Give heed to what I say;</p>
			<p class="t0">Since in his Danish kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel forbids your stay,</p>
			<p class="t0">I here, within my borders,<span class="hst">  </span>a home will gladly give you;</p>
			<p class="t0">There lives no lord so mighty<span class="hst">  </span>that he would ever dare from hence to drive you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the queen he answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“I too, myself, own land;</p>
			<p class="t0">There give I clothes and horses,<span class="hst">  </span>at will, with open hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">To wait on you as liegeman,<span class="hst">  </span>would make me sorry-hearted;</p>
			<p class="t0">And from my lands and castles,<span class="hst">  </span>more than a year, I never can be parted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last they all were going:<span class="hst">  </span>then begged the lovely queen,</p>
			<p class="t0">That when at court they waited,<span class="hst">  </span>they always might be seen</p>
			<p class="t0">Seated among the ladies;<span class="hst">  </span>no shame by this were done them:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said to her brave Irold,<span class="hst">  </span>that in their home this seat was ever shown them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To load with gifts these wanderers<span class="hst">  </span>the king was ever bent.</p>
			<p class="t0">But in a mood so haughty<span class="hst">  </span>had they been thither sent,</p>
			<p class="t0">To no man were they willing<span class="hst">  </span>to be for a mark beholden.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen, the king, was lordly,<span class="hst">  </span>and took it ill that their pride should them embolden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the king they now betook them;<span class="hst">  </span>many were they who came;</p>
			<p class="t0">There they found, for pastime,<span class="hst">  </span>for each some merry game:</p>
			<p class="t0">Draughts were many playing,<span class="hst">  </span>or spear and shield were trying;</p>
			<p class="t0">For these they cared but little,<span class="hst">  </span>but ever were in Hagen’s praises vying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As happens oft in Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>with every kind of fun</p>
			<p class="t0">Forthwith the men made merry.<span class="hst">  </span>In this old Wâ-te won</p>
			<p class="t0">A friend for himself in Hagen;<span class="hst">  </span>but to win the ladies’ praises,</p>
			<p class="t0">Horant, the knight from Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>his time in lightsome frolic with them passes.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Fru-te and also Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>were knights full brave and bold;</p>
			<p class="t0">When standing near each other,<span class="hst">  </span>both alike looked old.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their locks were gray and hoary,<span class="hst">  </span>and with gold were twisted;</p>
			<p class="t0">But where the bold were needed,<span class="hst">  </span>to show their bravery earnestly they listed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The followers of King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>wore their shields at court,</p>
			<p class="t0">With clubs as well as bucklers;<span class="hst">  </span>there they strove in sport,</p>
			<p class="t0">In the sword-play slashing;<span class="hst">  </span>thrusts of spears they parried;</p>
			<p class="t0">Well themselves they shielded.<span class="hst">  </span>The youthful knights in games were never wearied.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then asked the brave King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>of Wâ-te and his men,</p>
			<p class="t0">“If, where they erst were living,<span class="hst">  </span>such fights were ever seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or such heavy onslaughts,<span class="hst">  </span>as his good knights were dealing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Here in his Irish kingdom?”<span class="hst">  </span>A smile of scorn o’er Wâ-te’s face was stealing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then quoth the knight from Sturmland:<span class="hst">  </span>“The like I never saw;</p>
			<p class="t0">If any here could teach it,<span class="hst">  </span>from here would I not withdraw</p>
			<p class="t0">Till a year was fully ended,<span class="hst">  </span>and I had learned it rightly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoe’er should be my master,<span class="hst">  </span>for his care and pains would I not reward him lightly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king to him then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“For the love to you I bear,</p>
			<p class="t0">I will bid my best of masters<span class="hst">  </span>teach you his art with care,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till the three strokes are easy,<span class="hst">  </span>that, in field-storms raging,</p>
			<p class="t0">Men give to one another;<span class="hst">  </span>by this will you be helped when battle waging.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then came a fencing-master,<span class="hst">  </span>and began his craft to show</p>
			<p class="t0">To Wâ-te, the daring fighter;<span class="hst">  </span>in him he found a foe</p>
			<p class="t0">Who fear for his life soon gave him.<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te his onset parried,</p>
			<p class="t0">With all the skill of a fencer.<span class="hst">  </span>The face of Fru-te the Dane a smile now carried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To save himself, the teacher<span class="hst">  </span>gave a spring as wide</p>
			<p class="t0">As doth an untamed leopard.<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te his weapon plied,</p>
			<p class="t0">And in his hand it clattered,<span class="hst">  </span>until the fire-sparks glistened</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon his foeman’s buckler;<span class="hst">  </span>he well might thank the youth who to him had listened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the king, wild Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Give me the sword in hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">I will take a little pastime<span class="hst">  </span>with him of the Sturmisch land;</p>
			<p class="t0">I will be his teacher,<span class="hst">  </span>and he my four strokes be learning.</p>
			<p class="t0">He for this will thank me.”<span class="hst">  </span>Soon was the king high praise from Wâ-te earning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him old Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“A pledge I now must hear</p>
			<p class="t0">That I from you, great Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>no guile soe’er may fear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Should I by you be wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>with ladies’ scorn shall I redden.”</p>
			<p class="t0">In the fight was Wâ-te nimble;<span class="hst">  </span>such quickness to believe should none be bidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The simple, untaught fencer<span class="hst">  </span>smote Hagen many a blow;</p>
			<p class="t0">Till, like a wet brand steaming,<span class="hst">  </span>was the king before his foe.</p>
			<p class="t0">The learner outdid his teacher:<span class="hst">  </span>well his strength he boasted.</p>
			<p class="t0">The host laid strokes unnumbered<span class="hst">  </span>upon the guest, who in his skill had trusted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Many looked on gladly<span class="hst">  </span>to see the strength of both.</p>
			<p class="t0">To own the skill of Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>the king was nothing loth;</p>
			<p class="t0">He might have shown his anger,<span class="hst">  </span>and brought no shame upon him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Great was the strength of Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>but yet ’twas seen that Hagen had outdone him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the king then spake old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Let each no favor show,</p>
			<p class="t0">While we together struggle.<span class="hst">  </span>Well have I learned from you</p>
			<p class="t0">Your four strokes to be plying;<span class="hst">  </span>my thanks be you now sharing.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Such thanks he later showed him<span class="hst">  </span>as doth a fighting Frank or Saxon daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">No more a truce was thought of<span class="hst">  </span>by Wâ-te and the king;</p>
			<p class="t0">With strokes that loud were crashing,<span class="hst">  </span>the hall began to ring.</p>
			<p class="t0">Harder blows than ever<span class="hst">  </span>they gave, as now they battled;</p>
			<p class="t0">All their thrusts were sudden;<span class="hst">  </span>the knobs upon their swords snapped off and rattled.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The two sat down to rest them;<span class="hst">  </span>then Hagen said to his guest:</p>
			<p class="t0">“You fain would be a learner,<span class="hst">  </span>but you in truth are the best</p>
			<p class="t0">That ever I was teaching<span class="hst">  </span>the skill that the foeman dazes.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wherever you are fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>you in the field will win most worthy praises.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the king spake Irold:<span class="hst">  </span>“My lord, the strife is done</p>
			<p class="t0">That you so well were waging;<span class="hst">  </span>such fights have we seen won,</p>
			<p class="t0">In the land of our king and master.<span class="hst">  </span>Oft, at home, we freely</p>
			<p class="t0">Try our skill with weapons;<span class="hst">  </span>knights and squires there meet in matches daily.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then again spoke Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Did I this understand,</p>
			<p class="t0">I never a fighting weapon<span class="hst">  </span>had taken in my hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">No youth have I ever met with<span class="hst">  </span>who was so quick at learning.”</p>
			<p class="t0">When to these words they listened,<span class="hst">  </span>the face of many a one to smiles was turning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now by the king ’twas granted<span class="hst">  </span>to his guests to pass the day</p>
			<p class="t0">As they might all be choosing.<span class="hst">  </span>Glad of this were they,</p>
			<p class="t0">The men from out the Northland.<span class="hst">  </span>When the hours grew weary,</p>
			<p class="t0">They vied huge stones in hurling;<span class="hst">  </span>or else in shooting arrows made them merry.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c6">Tale the Sixth.<br/><span class="small">HOW SWEETLY HORANT SANG.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">It came to pass one evening,<span class="hst">  </span>good luck did so befall,</p>
			<p class="t0">That Horant, the knight of Daneland,<span class="hst">  </span>sang before them all.</p>
			<p class="t0">His singing was so wondrous<span class="hst">  </span>that all who listened near him</p>
			<p class="t0">Found his song well-pleasing;<span class="hst">  </span>the little birds all hushed their notes to hear him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">King Hagen heard him gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and with him all his men:</p>
			<p class="t0">The song of the Danish Horant<span class="hst">  </span>friends for him did gain.</p>
			<p class="t0">Likewise the queenly mother<span class="hst">  </span>hearkened with ear befitting,</p>
			<p class="t0">As it sounded thro’ the opening<span class="hst">  </span>where she upon the leaded roof was sitting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the fair young Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“What is it that I hear?</p>
			<p class="t0">Just now a song the sweetest<span class="hst">  </span>was thrilling on mine ear,</p>
			<p class="t0">That e’er from any singer<span class="hst">  </span>I heard until this hour.</p>
			<p class="t0">Would to God in heaven<span class="hst">  </span>my chamberlain to raise such notes had power!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then she bade them bring her<span class="hst">  </span>him who so sweetly sung;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon as the knight came forward,<span class="hst">  </span>thanks were on her tongue.</p>
			<p class="t0">For her with song the evening<span class="hst">  </span>blissfully was ended;</p>
			<p class="t0">By Lady Hilda’s women<span class="hst">  </span>the minstrel-knight was carefully befriended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the lovely Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“Once more you must let us hear</p>
			<p class="t0">The songs that you this evening<span class="hst">  </span>have made to us so dear.</p>
			<p class="t0">Truly it were blissful<span class="hst">  </span>every day, at even,</p>
			<p class="t0">To hear from you such singing;<span class="hst">  </span>for this would great reward to you be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Since you your thanks, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>have thus on me bestowed,</p>
			<p class="t0">Every day will I gladly<span class="hst">  </span>sing you a song as good;</p>
			<p class="t0">And whoso listens rightly<span class="hst">  </span>shall find his pains departed,</p>
			<p class="t0">His cares shall all be lessened,<span class="hst">  </span>and he henceforth will feel himself light-hearted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he his word had given,<span class="hst">  </span>forthwith he left the queen.</p>
			<p class="t0">Great reward in Ireland<span class="hst">  </span>did his singing win;</p>
			<p class="t0">Never in his birthland<span class="hst">  </span>had such to him been meted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus did the knight from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>give his help to Hettel, as him befitted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as the night was ended,<span class="hst">  </span>with the early dawn of day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Horant raised his carol;<span class="hst">  </span>the birds soon stopped their lay,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to his song they listened,<span class="hst">  </span>while in hedges hidden.</p>
			<p class="t0">The folk who yet were sleeping<span class="hst">  </span>rested no more, by his sweet tones upbidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Horant’s song rose softly,<span class="hst">  </span>higher and yet more sweet;</p>
			<p class="t0">King Hagen also heard it,<span class="hst">  </span>while near his wife was his seat.</p>
			<p class="t0">From out their inner chamber<span class="hst">  </span>drawn to the roof, they waited;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their guest of this had warning;<span class="hst">  </span>and Hilda the young gave ear, where she was seated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The daughter of wild Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>with her maids around her heard</p>
			<p class="t0">From where they sat and listened;<span class="hst">  </span>and now each little bird</p>
			<p class="t0">Wholly forgot his singing,<span class="hst">  </span>and in the court-yard lighted;</p>
			<p class="t0">The warriors hearkened also,<span class="hst">  </span>and well the song of the Danish minstrel greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thanks to him were given<span class="hst">  </span>by women and by men;</p>
			<p class="t0">“But,” said the Danish Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>“would that I ne’er again</p>
			<p class="t0">Such songs might hear him singing.<span class="hst">  </span>Whom would he be pleasing?</p>
			<p class="t0">To whom is my witless nephew<span class="hst">  </span>such worthless morning-hymns so bent on raising?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake King Hagen’s liegemen:<span class="hst">  </span>“My lord, let him be heard;</p>
			<p class="t0">There’s none so sick is lying<span class="hst">  </span>but would in truth be cheered,</p>
			<p class="t0">If to the songs he listened<span class="hst">  </span>which fall from him so sweetly.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Said Hagen: “Would to Heaven<span class="hst">  </span>such skill to sing were mine; ’twould glad me greatly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the knightly minstrel<span class="hst">  </span>three songs to the end had sung,</p>
			<p class="t0">No one there who heard him<span class="hst">  </span>thought they were too long,</p>
			<p class="t0">The turn of a hand, not longer,<span class="hst">  </span>they had thought it lasted,</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en if they had listened<span class="hst">  </span>while for a thousand miles a horseman hasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When his song he ended,<span class="hst">  </span>and to leave his seat was seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">The youthful, queenly maiden<span class="hst">  </span>more blithe had never been,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor decked, at early morning,<span class="hst">  </span>in gayer clothes or better;</p>
			<p class="t0">Forthwith the high-born lady<span class="hst">  </span>sent to beg her father now to meet her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then came her father quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>and on the maiden looked,</p>
			<p class="t0">While, in a mood of sadness,<span class="hst">  </span>her father’s chin she stroked;</p>
			<p class="t0">With her hand she coaxed him,<span class="hst">  </span>to make her word the stronger,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “My dearest father,<span class="hst">  </span>bid that he at court may sing yet longer.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He answered: “Best loved daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>if again, at the hour of eve,</p>
			<p class="t0">His songs he deigns to sing you,<span class="hst">  </span>a thousand pounds I’ll give.</p>
			<p class="t0">But now a mien so lofty<span class="hst">  </span>these guests of ours are wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">To us ’tis not so pleasant<span class="hst">  </span>here, at court, to give his songs a hearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">However much she pressed him,<span class="hst">  </span>would the king no longer stay;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then strove again young Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>and never on any day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had his knightly song been better.<span class="hst">  </span>Sick and well together</p>
			<p class="t0">All lost their wits in hearing,<span class="hst">  </span>and none could leave who to listen once came hither.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The wild beasts in the forest<span class="hst">  </span>let their pasture grow;</p>
			<p class="t0">The little worms that creeping<span class="hst">  </span>through grass are wont to go,</p>
			<p class="t0">The fishes, too, that ever<span class="hst">  </span>amidst the waves were swimming,</p>
			<p class="t0">All now stopped to listen;<span class="hst">  </span>the singer’s heart with pride was overbrimming.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whatever he might sing to them,<span class="hst">  </span>to no one seemed it long;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ill vied with his song the choral<span class="hst">  </span>which by priests is sung.</p>
			<p class="t0">Even the bells no longer<span class="hst">  </span>rang as of yore so sweetly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Every one who heard him<span class="hst">  </span>was moved by Horant’s song, and saddened greatly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then begged the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>that he to her be brought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Without her father’s knowledge,<span class="hst">  </span>she slyly this besought.</p>
			<p class="t0">From her mother, Hilda, also<span class="hst">  </span>must the tale be hidden</p>
			<p class="t0">That unto her, in her bower,<span class="hst">  </span>unknown to all, the minstrel had been bidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">It was a yielding chamberlain<span class="hst">  </span>who did the wages gain,</p>
			<p class="t0">That, for his help, she gave him;<span class="hst">  </span>red gold it was, I ween.</p>
			<p class="t0">Glittering and heavy,<span class="hst">  </span>with armlets twelve, full-weighted.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas thus within her bower<span class="hst">  </span>the maid, at eventide, the singer greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By hidden ways he did it;<span class="hst">  </span>Horant was glad indeed</p>
			<p class="t0">That such good-will and kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>at court, had been his meed.</p>
			<p class="t0">To win her love for his master<span class="hst">  </span>from far had he been faring;</p>
			<p class="t0">To his tuneful skill he owed it<span class="hst">  </span>that she such friendly will to him was bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She bade her faithful chamberlain<span class="hst">  </span>to stand before the house;</p>
			<p class="t0">That so there might be no one<span class="hst">  </span>who could the threshold cross</p>
			<p class="t0">Until the songs were ended,<span class="hst">  </span>soon heard with praises truthful.</p>
			<p class="t0">None went into her bower<span class="hst">  </span>but Horant only and Morunc the youthful.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She bade the bard be seated:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now sing to me once more,”</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus spake the high-born maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>“those songs I heard before.</p>
			<p class="t0">For this I feel sore craving;<span class="hst">  </span>than aught beside ’tis sweeter</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto your lays to listen;<span class="hst">  </span>than any gem or pastime ’tis far better.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If I might dare to sing to you,<span class="hst">  </span>most fair and lovely maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">And never need be fearful<span class="hst">  </span>for this to lose my head,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thro’ your father’s anger,<span class="hst">  </span>never will I falter</p>
			<p class="t0">In any wise to serve you,<span class="hst">  </span>if in my master’s land you’ll seek a shelter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He then began a ditty<span class="hst">  </span>of a mermaid of Amilé,</p>
			<p class="t0">Which never man nor Christian<span class="hst">  </span>had learned to sing or say,</p>
			<p class="t0">Although he may have heard it<span class="hst">  </span>on some wild, unknown water.</p>
			<p class="t0">In this the good knight, Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>gave honor meet at court to Hagen’s daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last, when he the love-song<span class="hst">  </span>had sung unto the end,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the lovely maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Thanks I give, my friend.”</p>
			<p class="t0">She drew a ring from her finger,<span class="hst">  </span>nought of gold were fairer,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “I give it gladly;<span class="hst">  </span>be this of my good-will to you the bearer.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now her word she pledged him,<span class="hst">  </span>and with it gave her hand:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Should she of a crown be wearer,<span class="hst">  </span>and ever sway the land,</p>
			<p class="t0">That ne’er by the hand of any<span class="hst">  </span>need he be further driven</p>
			<p class="t0">Than unto her in her castle;<span class="hst">  </span>there to live in honor would leave be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of all she pressed upon him<span class="hst">  </span>nothing would he take</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless indeed a girdle.<span class="hst">  </span>He said: “Let no man speak,</p>
			<p class="t0">And say that I the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>e’er for myself was wooing;</p>
			<p class="t0">I will to my master bring her,<span class="hst">  </span>and for this his heart shall be with bliss o’erflowing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She asked: “Who is thy master?<span class="hst">  </span>By name how is he known?</p>
			<p class="t0">Have e’er his liegemen crowned him?<span class="hst">  </span>And any lands doth he own?</p>
			<p class="t0">For love of thee, most truly,<span class="hst">  </span>good-will I bear him ever.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The knight from Denmark answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“A king so rich and mighty saw I never.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “To none betray us,<span class="hst">  </span>most fair and lovely maid;</p>
			<p class="t0">To thee will I tell most gladly<span class="hst">  </span>what our master said,</p>
			<p class="t0">When from his land we started,<span class="hst">  </span>hither to come at his bidding;</p>
			<p class="t0">For thy dear sake, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>unto thy father’s land and castle speeding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “Then tell me freely<span class="hst">  </span>the errand on which you’re sent</p>
			<p class="t0">By him you call your master;<span class="hst">  </span>if my will that way is bent</p>
			<p class="t0">I shall let you know it truly,<span class="hst">  </span>before we yet are parted.”</p>
			<p class="t0">But Horant feared wild Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>and began at court to feel himself faint-hearted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the lady thus he answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To you he sends this word,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That his heart for you is longing;<span class="hst">  </span>his love alone is stirred.</p>
			<p class="t0">For him, I beg, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>let now your kindness waken;</p>
			<p class="t0">He from other women<span class="hst">  </span>has for your sake his love and longing taken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “May God reward him;<span class="hst">  </span>such love for me he shows.</p>
			<p class="t0">If he in birth is my fellow,<span class="hst">  </span>I fain would be his spouse,</p>
			<p class="t0">If you will deign to sing to me<span class="hst">  </span>every morn and even.”</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “That will I gladly;<span class="hst">  </span>to this no care by you need e’er be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quoth he to the queenly Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“Most fair and high-born maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">There daily live with my master,<span class="hst">  </span>and long at court have staid,</p>
			<p class="t0">Twelve minstrels who, before me,<span class="hst">  </span>earn much higher praises;</p>
			<p class="t0">But, though sweet their singing,<span class="hst">  </span>my lord, the king, in song still better pleases.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “If your loving master<span class="hst">  </span>in song so skilful be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of longing for him, truly,<span class="hst">  </span>I never can be free;</p>
			<p class="t0">My best of thanks I give him<span class="hst">  </span>for the love he now is showing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, dared I leave my father,<span class="hst">  </span>gladly from here would I with you be going.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Morunc:<span class="hst">  </span>“Lady, with us there are</p>
			<p class="t0">Warriors full seven hundred:<span class="hst">  </span>our weal or woe they share,</p>
			<p class="t0">And each for this is ready;<span class="hst">  </span>if once in our hands we have you,</p>
			<p class="t0">Know you nor fear nor sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>lest we to meet wild Hagen’s wrath should leave you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “From Hagen’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>we wish forthwith to go;</p>
			<p class="t0">Therefore beg your father<span class="hst">  </span>the kindness to us to show,</p>
			<p class="t0">Youthful, high-born maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>that he and your queenly mother</p>
			<p class="t0">Will deign our bark to look on;<span class="hst">  </span>and you must also come, e’en if no other.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“That will I do most gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>if my father’s leave you have;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of him and those about him<span class="hst">  </span>this boon you now must crave,</p>
			<p class="t0">That I and my maidens also<span class="hst">  </span>may ride to the shore some morning.</p>
			<p class="t0">If he shall grant your wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>three days before, of the time you must give us warning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The first of all the chamberlains<span class="hst">  </span>was wont, and had a right,</p>
			<p class="t0">Often to be with the maidens.<span class="hst">  </span>Just then, this very knight</p>
			<p class="t0">There had come for pastime,<span class="hst">  </span>and to give to them his greeting;</p>
			<p class="t0">There found he Horant and Morunc;<span class="hst">  </span>well might they fear some harm was their lives awaiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said to Lady Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“Who are they sitting here?”</p>
			<p class="t0">From the lord so hot and hasty<span class="hst">  </span>was never such wrath to fear.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Whoe’er allowed you<span class="hst">  </span>to come into this bower?</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoso in this hath helped you<span class="hst">  </span>ne’er showed you falser friendship to this hour.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “Now soothe your anger:<span class="hst">  </span>in peace pray let them live.</p>
			<p class="t0">If to yourself great evil<span class="hst">  </span>you do not wish to give,</p>
			<p class="t0">You must unseen by any,<span class="hst">  </span>them to their rooms be bringing;</p>
			<p class="t0">It else hath helped but little<span class="hst">  </span>that his knightly songs the minstrel here was singing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Is this the knight,” he asked her,<span class="hst">  </span>“they say so well can sing?</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en such a minstrel know I:<span class="hst">  </span>never hath any king</p>
			<p class="t0">Had a braver fighter.<span class="hst">  </span>My father and his mother</p>
			<p class="t0">Were children of one father;<span class="hst">  </span>worthier knight than he there’s not another.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The maid began to ask him:<span class="hst">  </span>“Tell me, then, his name.”</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Men call him Horant;<span class="hst">  </span>from the Danish land he came.</p>
			<p class="t0">Although no crown he weareth,<span class="hst">  </span>he yet for one is fitted:</p>
			<p class="t0">We now know not each other,<span class="hst">  </span>but once at Hettel’s court our love we plighted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Morunc, too, was telling<span class="hst">  </span>that erst, in his fatherland,</p>
			<p class="t0">He also had been outlawed,<span class="hst">  </span>his heart was sorely pained.</p>
			<p class="t0">His eyes with tears were welling,<span class="hst">  </span>and now were overflowing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the queenly lady<span class="hst">  </span>kindly looked on him, her sorrow showing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then saw the chamberlain also<span class="hst">  </span>how that his eyes were wet.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Most worthy lady,<span class="hst">  </span>these friends whom here we meet</p>
			<p class="t0">I know to be my kinsmen;<span class="hst">  </span>help now that all goes rightly</p>
			<p class="t0">With both these worthy champions:<span class="hst">  </span>most careful will I be to keep them fitly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Much for them he sorrowed,<span class="hst">  </span>and felt heart-pain, forsooth;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Durst I before my ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>I would kiss upon the mouth</p>
			<p class="t0">Each of these knights so worthy.<span class="hst">  </span>The days indeed are many</p>
			<p class="t0">Since tidings of King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>I could from a Hegeling ask, or learn from any.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the maiden further:<span class="hst">  </span>“Since these thy kinsmen be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now so much the dearer<span class="hst">  </span>are they as guests to me.</p>
			<p class="t0">Known unto my father<span class="hst">  </span>thou should’st quickly make them;</p>
			<p class="t0">They will not then so hastily<span class="hst">  </span>to their homes afar across the sea betake them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A busy talk began they,<span class="hst">  </span>those two young heroes brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">Morunc unto the chamberlain<span class="hst">  </span>his mind most freely gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said for Lady Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>they came within those borders;</p>
			<p class="t0">And that their master Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>to bring her back had sent them, as her warders.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to them the chamberlain:<span class="hst">  </span>“A twofold care I feel,</p>
			<p class="t0">As liegeman of my master,<span class="hst">  </span>and to help you, too, as well.</p>
			<p class="t0">How could I turn his anger,<span class="hst">  </span>if he knew you now were seeking</p>
			<p class="t0">To win his maiden daughter?<span class="hst">  </span>Never from here could you your way be taking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Horant:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hear well what now I say;</p>
			<p class="t0">In four days’ time to Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>we will come, and him will pray</p>
			<p class="t0">That we may leave his kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>if such may be his pleasure.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king will then make ready<span class="hst">  </span>gifts for us of clothes, as well as treasure.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“We will ask for nothing further,<span class="hst">  </span>(help you here must lend,)</p>
			<p class="t0">But that Hagen shall be willing,<span class="hst">  </span>as well beseems a friend,</p>
			<p class="t0">To come to the shore to see us,<span class="hst">  </span>my lady with him riding,—</p>
			<p class="t0">His wife, the high-born Hilda;<span class="hst">  </span>there to see the ship in which we’re biding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Might we in this be lucky,<span class="hst">  </span>our toil we well shall spend;</p>
			<p class="t0">And, with a happy outcome,<span class="hst">  </span>our sorrows have an end.</p>
			<p class="t0">If only to the seashore<span class="hst">  </span>he will ride with his daughter,</p>
			<p class="t0">We well shall be rewarded<span class="hst">  </span>at home by our master Hettel, for whom we sought her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then from out the castle<span class="hst">  </span>they were led by the crafty man,</p>
			<p class="t0">So that the kingly Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>mistrusted not their plan.</p>
			<p class="t0">When, for their floating shelter,<span class="hst">  </span>they the courtyard quitted,</p>
			<p class="t0">All they had done for their master<span class="hst">  </span>should not, I ween, by him at home be slighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They told the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>what yet to none was known:</p>
			<p class="t0">They said the high-born maiden<span class="hst">  </span>her love did freely own</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto their master, Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>for whom they now had sought her;</p>
			<p class="t0">They talked with wise old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>how best to bring her home across the water.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Were she once outside the gate,</p>
			<p class="t0">And I the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>there might only meet,</p>
			<p class="t0">However hard the struggle<span class="hst">  </span>that there we had with the foeman,</p>
			<p class="t0">To cross her father’s threshold<span class="hst">  </span>none again should see that lovely woman.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Their plot, well-laid and crafty,<span class="hst">  </span>to no one did they break,</p>
			<p class="t0">But slyly made them ready<span class="hst">  </span>their homeward way to take.</p>
			<p class="t0">This they told the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>on board their ship there lying;</p>
			<p class="t0">Not loth were they to hear it,<span class="hst">  </span>for now to sail the weary men were sighing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They quickly brought together<span class="hst">  </span>such goods as they did own;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, in stillness whispered,<span class="hst">  </span>their hidden thought made known.</p>
			<p class="t0">Later, throughout Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>it was mourned, with bitter wailing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Though woe it brought to Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>the Hegeling’s greatness would it soon be telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon the fourth day’s morning<span class="hst">  </span>to court they bravely rode,</p>
			<p class="t0">With new and well-cut clothing;<span class="hst">  </span>none better ever showed.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the guests there gathered<span class="hst">  </span>were their wishes speaking;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the king and all his liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>they asked that they their leave might now be taking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake to them King Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Why will you leave my land?</p>
			<p class="t0">So far as I was able,<span class="hst">  </span>I have striven for this end,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That you within my kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>should meet with kindness only;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now would you hence be sailing,<span class="hst">  </span>leaving me here, to lead a life all lonely.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him old Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“The Hegeling king, our lord,</p>
			<p class="t0">Has sent to call us homeward;<span class="hst">  </span>he will not hear a word</p>
			<p class="t0">Of aught but our forgiveness.<span class="hst">  </span>Then, too, for us are mourning</p>
			<p class="t0">Those we left behind us;<span class="hst">  </span>we therefore soon must back on our way be turning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to him wild Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Your loss my heart doth break;</p>
			<p class="t0">Horses and fine clothing<span class="hst">  </span>deign, for my love, to take,</p>
			<p class="t0">With gold and costly jewels.<span class="hst">  </span>Right well it doth beseem me</p>
			<p class="t0">For all your gifts to pay you;<span class="hst">  </span>in this shall no one ever dare to blame me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the hoary Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Too rich am I to-day</p>
			<p class="t0">That I the gold you give us<span class="hst">  </span>should wish to take away.</p>
			<p class="t0">Our master, whose forgiveness<span class="hst">  </span>our friends have lately won us,</p>
			<p class="t0">The rich and mighty Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>in such a deed would truly never own us.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“One thing we have yet further,<span class="hst">  </span>my lord, to ask of thee;</p>
			<p class="t0">(If you this kindness show us,<span class="hst">  </span>a worthy boon, ’twill be.)</p>
			<p class="t0">It is that you shall witness<span class="hst">  </span>how well we can be feasting;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of food for hearty eaters<span class="hst">  </span>we have in store what might three years be lasting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“To all who ask we give it,<span class="hst">  </span>for hence we sail o’er the deep;</p>
			<p class="t0">May God long give you honor,<span class="hst">  </span>yourself may He ever keep.</p>
			<p class="t0">We now betake us homeward,<span class="hst">  </span>we here may bide no longer;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now may you and your kinsfolk<span class="hst">  </span>ride with us to our ship; no guard were stronger.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If but your lovely daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>and with her my lady, your wife,</p>
			<p class="t0">Shall look upon our riches,<span class="hst">  </span>glad will it make our life,</p>
			<p class="t0">And dear to us forever.<span class="hst">  </span>If this to us be granted,</p>
			<p class="t0">Great and good King Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>from you no other gifts shall e’er be wanted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to his guests he answered,<span class="hst">  </span>with seemly, well-bred mien:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Since you are now so earnest,<span class="hst">  </span>at early morn shall be seen</p>
			<p class="t0">A hundred mares made ready,<span class="hst">  </span>saddled for woman or maiden;</p>
			<p class="t0">I, too, will ride down with them;<span class="hst">  </span>right glad am I that to see your ship I’m bidden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then for the night they left him,<span class="hst">  </span>and rode away to the shore.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then up on the beach was carried<span class="hst">  </span>of wine a goodly store,</p>
			<p class="t0">That in the bark was lying;<span class="hst">  </span>for food they were not lacking.</p>
			<p class="t0">By this the ship was lightened;<span class="hst">  </span>wisely had Fru-te of Denmark his plans been making.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c7">Tale the Seventh.<br/><span class="small">HOW THE MAIDENS CAME TO SEE THE SHIP, AND WERE CARRIED TO HETTEL’S KINGDOM.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Early on the morrow,<span class="hst">  </span>after the mass was said,</p>
			<p class="t0">To don their richest clothing<span class="hst">  </span>strove each wife and maid:</p>
			<p class="t0">A throng of these King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>to the sandy shore was leading;</p>
			<p class="t0">And with them riding gayly<span class="hst">  </span>a thousand stalwart Irish knights were speeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Within the town of Ballian<span class="hst">  </span>the guests had heard the mass.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all the woe and sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>that soon would come to pass,</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen as yet knew nothing:<span class="hst">  </span>little honor was left him</p>
			<p class="t0">By his guests’ withdrawal;<span class="hst">  </span>this of his fair and well-born child bereft him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now they all had ridden<span class="hst">  </span>to the ships upon the strand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda and her ladies<span class="hst">  </span>were lifted down on the sand.</p>
			<p class="t0">The young and lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>to see the ships were taken:</p>
			<p class="t0">The traders’ booths were open,<span class="hst">  </span>and the goods did wonder great in the queen awaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Many fair-wrought jewels<span class="hst">  </span>lay in sight in the shops,</p>
			<p class="t0">Such as men prize highly;<span class="hst">  </span>King Hagen to see them stops,</p>
			<p class="t0">And many with him also:<span class="hst">  </span>soon as the goods were shown them,</p>
			<p class="t0">The maidens, too, must see them,<span class="hst">  </span>and rings and bands of gold were pressed upon them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To see the sights King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>into a boat had gone:</p>
			<p class="t0">Not all the booths were open,<span class="hst">  </span>nor all the goods were shown,</p>
			<p class="t0">When Wâ-te’s men heaved anchor<span class="hst">  </span>up from the sea-sands deftly,</p>
			<p class="t0">And Hilda with her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>was borne away from the land of her fathers swiftly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For no one’s hate and anger<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te greatly cares;</p>
			<p class="t0">Little he recks what happens<span class="hst">  </span>to the shops of costly wares:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hilda, the queenly mother,<span class="hst">  </span>was sundered from her daughter;</p>
			<p class="t0">The men, in the ship long hidden,<span class="hst">  </span>up-sprang and sorrow made for Hagen on the water.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the sails were hoisted,<span class="hst">  </span>and ’twas seen that they were set:</p>
			<p class="t0">From the ship they threw the foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>who thoroughly were wet,</p>
			<p class="t0">Like sea-birds on the water,<span class="hst">  </span>when near the sands they flutter.</p>
			<p class="t0">For her daughter dear-belovéd<span class="hst">  </span>sorrow and anger the queen aloud did utter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the weaponed fighters<span class="hst">  </span>by Hagen there were seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, in truth, how scornful<span class="hst">  </span>and wrathful was his mien!</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now bring to me my long-spear,<span class="hst">  </span>to feel it I will teach them;</p>
			<p class="t0">They all shall die full quickly<span class="hst">  </span>when my strong right arm with that shall reach them!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Boldly then spoke Morunc:<span class="hst">  </span>“Be not so much in haste!</p>
			<p class="t0">Though now you think to fight us,<span class="hst">  </span>and to rush on us so fast</p>
			<p class="t0">With a thousand well-armed foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>we yet will overthrow them,</p>
			<p class="t0">And fling them into the water;<span class="hst">  </span>a damp, cold lodging we will quickly show them!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Still, brave Hagen’s followers<span class="hst">  </span>the fight would not give o’er;</p>
			<p class="t0">The water shone and glistened<span class="hst">  </span>with the armor that they wore;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then they drew their long-swords,<span class="hst">  </span>spears were thickly flying;</p>
			<p class="t0">But oars were dipped full quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>and fast the boats away from the shore were hieing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The bold and daring Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>from the sands had given a bound</p>
			<p class="t0">Into a well-manned row-boat;<span class="hst">  </span>loud did his mail resound,</p>
			<p class="t0">As he, with fifty warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>after Hilda hasted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen’s careless followers<span class="hst">  </span>now must rouse themselves, no time they wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Onward came King Hagen;<span class="hst">  </span>his fighting-gear he wore,</p>
			<p class="t0">And a heavy sword, the sharpest,<span class="hst">  </span>he proudly with him bore;</p>
			<p class="t0">But now the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>almost too long had waited;</p>
			<p class="t0">Wild and grim was Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>and high his spear he raised ’gainst his foe belated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Loudly then he shouted,<span class="hst">  </span>and bade his men make haste;</p>
			<p class="t0">None of all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>would he allow to rest,</p>
			<p class="t0">Hoping these guests, now fleeing,<span class="hst">  </span>who had been such traitors,</p>
			<p class="t0">Might be with speed o’ertaken,<span class="hst">  </span>and either should be slain, or bound in fetters.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king had now about him<span class="hst">  </span>fighters many and brave,</p>
			<p class="t0">But yet he could not follow<span class="hst">  </span>across the wild sea-wave;</p>
			<p class="t0">His ships were all unready,<span class="hst">  </span>and many of them leaking,</p>
			<p class="t0">When now he would be sailing;<span class="hst">  </span>of Hagen’s blame for this were all soon speaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On the gravelly sea-shore standing,<span class="hst">  </span>no other way he knew</p>
			<p class="t0">But that more ships be builded<span class="hst">  </span>for him and his liegemen true,</p>
			<p class="t0">And workmen called together,<span class="hst">  </span>who must therein be speedy:</p>
			<p class="t0">All came who now were able,<span class="hst">  </span>and these he found to be both skilled and ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon the seventh morning,<span class="hst">  </span>there left the Irish land</p>
			<p class="t0">The men sent forth by Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>to ask for Hilda’s hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">And bring to him the lady.<span class="hst">  </span>They were a thousand barely;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen brought against them<span class="hst">  </span>thirty hundred men, if reckoned fairly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The daring knights of Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>sent men home before,</p>
			<p class="t0">To carry word to Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>that Hagen’s child they bore,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to his land would bring her,<span class="hst">  </span>with honor him befitting.</p>
			<p class="t0">Though now they little thought it,<span class="hst">  </span>still harder work erelong must they be meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To them their master, Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>in happy mood then spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“My sorrows now are over.<span class="hst">  </span>Great toils my liegemen took</p>
			<p class="t0">For me in Hagen’s kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>and now have brought me gladness;</p>
			<p class="t0">Since they on their errand left me,<span class="hst">  </span>fear for their doom has filled my heart with sadness.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Dear friends, if with your tidings<span class="hst">  </span>you have not me betrayed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And do not tell me falsely<span class="hst">  </span>that you have seen the maid</p>
			<p class="t0">Near to my land and kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>and in my friends’ safe-keeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">For your tale will I reward you,<span class="hst">  </span>and gladly will your praise be ever speaking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They said: “No lie we tell you,<span class="hst">  </span>that we the maid have seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">But when we miles had measured,<span class="hst">  </span>the daughter of the queen</p>
			<p class="t0">Sadly said, for our welfare<span class="hst">  </span>she feared, and was heavy-hearted,</p>
			<p class="t0">Lest the king, her father,<span class="hst">  </span>to follow with his ships e’en then had started.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For the tidings, Hettel gave them<span class="hst">  </span>a hundred marks in worth;</p>
			<p class="t0">For all his knights there gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>men at once brought forth</p>
			<p class="t0">Swords as well as helmets,<span class="hst">  </span>and shields for them were bidden:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus from Hettel’s castle<span class="hst">  </span>they went, as if to court, to bring the maiden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All the men he was able<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel for this now sought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Greatly was he hoping,<span class="hst">  </span>and much thereof he thought,</p>
			<p class="t0">So great a host to muster,<span class="hst">  </span>and these so well outfitted,</p>
			<p class="t0">That never to king’s fair daughter<span class="hst">  </span>so fine a welcome might again be meted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In haste were all then bidden<span class="hst">  </span>who ought with him to go;</p>
			<p class="t0">They still made ready slowly,<span class="hst">  </span>till gifts he should bestow</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all things that they needed;<span class="hst">  </span>they for this were waiting.</p>
			<p class="t0">At length by him were gathered<span class="hst">  </span>a thousand men or more, for Hilda’s greeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gay were they in clothing,—<span class="hst">  </span>’gainst this could none say nay,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Poor as well as wealthy<span class="hst">  </span>were shining in war-array:</p>
			<p class="t0">To bring the lovely ladies<span class="hst">  </span>to their new home and dwelling</p>
			<p class="t0">Were Hettel’s lieges earnest;<span class="hst">  </span>with lofty hopes of this their hearts were swelling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as they left the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>shouts the land did fill,</p>
			<p class="t0">As they their way were making<span class="hst">  </span>thro’ lowland and o’er hill;</p>
			<p class="t0">Men saw upon the pathways<span class="hst">  </span>crowds still thronging nearer:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel hastened forward,<span class="hst">  </span>to see the maid, than every other dearer.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last the aged Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>the knight from the Sturmisch land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had reached the Waalisch marches<span class="hst">  </span>and stepped upon the sand.</p>
			<p class="t0">There on the shore were gathered<span class="hst">  </span>the sailors, water-weary;</p>
			<p class="t0">Shelter they sought for Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>and in a friendly land were glad to tarry.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Stakes for tents were driven<span class="hst">  </span>near to the broad sea-flood</p>
			<p class="t0">By the followers of Wâ-te;<span class="hst">  </span>they were in happy mood.</p>
			<p class="t0">Erelong the news was bruited,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon to them was given,</p>
			<p class="t0">That Hettel, king of the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>had left his home, and now was near them even;</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">And that he with many liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>was riding down to the shore,</p>
			<p class="t0">To meet his well-belovéd.<span class="hst">  </span>Now hoped the maids the more</p>
			<p class="t0">That she with greatest honor<span class="hst">  </span>should, as her birth befitted,</p>
			<p class="t0">Be brought into his kingdom.<span class="hst">  </span>No more the thought of strife their hearts affrighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The guests for nothing wanted,<span class="hst">  </span>they had both wine and food;</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who were living near them<span class="hst">  </span>freely on them bestowed</p>
			<p class="t0">The best that they were able;<span class="hst">  </span>the wants of all they heeded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er they had they gave them,<span class="hst">  </span>and left them not to lack for aught they needed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel now drew nearer<span class="hst">  </span>to those who had reached his land;</p>
			<p class="t0">And with him, gathered hastily,<span class="hst">  </span>the strong and goodly band,</p>
			<p class="t0">Drawn from his father’s kingdom.<span class="hst">  </span>They came bedecked so gaily,</p>
			<p class="t0">And in such glittering armor,<span class="hst">  </span>the guests looked on full glad, and praised them freely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the men of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>came down upon the plain,</p>
			<p class="t0">And soon the rushing riders<span class="hst">  </span>a tilting-match began;</p>
			<p class="t0">All with youthful boldness<span class="hst">  </span>for knightly prizes striving:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then came the Danish Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>and with him Wâ-te, wise as any living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They were seen from afar by Hettel;<span class="hst">  </span>happy in heart was he.</p>
			<p class="t0">His horse he set a-prancing;<span class="hst">  </span>right glad was he to see</p>
			<p class="t0">Two of his bravest liegemen,<span class="hst">  </span>sent by him o’er the water,</p>
			<p class="t0">With fighters bold to Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>in hopes to win for him wild Hagen’s daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On him, too, looked they gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>their worthy king, so good;</p>
			<p class="t0">Each day they spent there with him<span class="hst">  </span>found them in happy mood.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te with all his fellows,<span class="hst">  </span>while far away they were living,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had known much bitter hardship:<span class="hst">  </span>for this would Hettel now reward be giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As he met his friendly liegemen,<span class="hst">  </span>King Hettel wore a smile;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said he to them kindly:<span class="hst">  </span>“Much have I feared erewhile</p>
			<p class="t0">For you, my faithful helpers,<span class="hst">  </span>and a heavy heart was bearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Lest in Hagen’s castles<span class="hst">  </span>my men were held, and all were bondage sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then for love he kissed them,<span class="hst">  </span>both those gray old men;</p>
			<p class="t0">His eyes had never rested<span class="hst">  </span>on so glad a sight as then,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor on a fairer pasture<span class="hst">  </span>had fed, with longing fonder.</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween that never to Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>was aught so full of bliss and sudden wonder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>No harm to us was done;</p>
			<p class="t0">But yet a sway so mighty<span class="hst">  </span>I ne’er before have known,</p>
			<p class="t0">As this that wild King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>over his lands now wieldeth:</p>
			<p class="t0">His followers bear them proudly,<span class="hst">  </span>and he himself in strength to no one yieldeth.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“It was a day as happy<span class="hst">  </span>as ever could be thought,</p>
			<p class="t0">When we to you sent tidings<span class="hst">  </span>that we had Hilda brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">The loveliest of maidens<span class="hst">  </span>(no falsehood have I spoken,</p>
			<p class="t0">Believe the tale I tell you)<span class="hst">  </span>that ever in this world my eyes did look on.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high-born knight then added:<span class="hst">  </span>“Belike with greatest speed</p>
			<p class="t0">Will come these daring foemen;<span class="hst">  </span>for this should you take heed</p>
			<p class="t0">Lest the angry Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>soon shall overtake us</p>
			<p class="t0">Here within your marches;<span class="hst">  </span>if so, his hatred bitter woe will make us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Wâ-te and Sir Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>down to the shore did bring</p>
			<p class="t0">Many worthy followers,<span class="hst">  </span>knights of Hettel, the king,</p>
			<p class="t0">There to see fair Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>and there must they await her.</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon their shining bucklers<span class="hst">  </span>many a spear-shaft crashed in battle later.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now came the fair young maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>under a comely hat;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then all the men of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>who on their horses sat</p>
			<p class="t0">By the side of the king, their master,<span class="hst">  </span>upon the grass alighted.</p>
			<p class="t0">With merry hearts then gladly<span class="hst">  </span>the well-bred throng their love and friendship plighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold, he of Ortland,<span class="hst">  </span>and Morunc of the Frisian land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Both of those brave champions,<span class="hst">  </span>one on either hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Came with lovely Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hettel soon were meeting;</p>
			<p class="t0">Worthy was she of praises.<span class="hst">  </span>Now thought the maid to give the king her greeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With her there came young maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>twenty or even more,</p>
			<p class="t0">All clad in fair white linen,—<span class="hst">  </span>whiter none e’er wore,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Or best of silken clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>that could be found by any:</p>
			<p class="t0">Proud were they to wear them,<span class="hst">  </span>and, gaily decked, they there were seen by many.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king, both good and stately,<span class="hst">  </span>then began to greet</p>
			<p class="t0">With well-bred, seemly bearing,<span class="hst">  </span>the maid he thought was meet</p>
			<p class="t0">To wear the crown hereafter.<span class="hst">  </span>He gazed on her with yearning;</p>
			<p class="t0">Her in his arms he folded,<span class="hst">  </span>and fondly kissed the maid, her face upturning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then one by one he welcomed<span class="hst">  </span>all the maidens fair;</p>
			<p class="t0">But one there was among them<span class="hst">  </span>so lofty in her air</p>
			<p class="t0">She might of birth be kingly:<span class="hst">  </span>in nought her kin were lacking.</p>
			<p class="t0">She was one of the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>who with the griffin long her home was making.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She bore the name of Hildeburg:<span class="hst">  </span>from Hilda, Hagen’s wife,</p>
			<p class="t0">She ever had won the honor<span class="hst">  </span>befitting her worthy life;</p>
			<p class="t0">Born in the land of Portugal,<span class="hst">  </span>thence had she been taken.</p>
			<p class="t0">She now saw many strangers:<span class="hst">  </span>a longing sad for her friends did this awaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel to all the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>gave a welcome free,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet was their lot no brighter;<span class="hst">  </span>for when they thought to see</p>
			<p class="t0">An end of all their sadness,<span class="hst">  </span>upon the coming morrow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon as the day was dawning,<span class="hst">  </span>there came to them again as great a sorrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Her throng of high-born followers<span class="hst">  </span>were greeted on every side;</p>
			<p class="t0">Near to Hagen’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>on a flowery meadow wide,</p>
			<p class="t0">Under silken awnings,<span class="hst">  </span>many there were seated.</p>
			<p class="t0">But Hagen was now too near them;<span class="hst">  </span>to them from him must many ills be meted.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c8">Tale the Eighth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HAGEN FOLLOWED HIS DAUGHTER.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the day was dawning,<span class="hst">  </span>there was seen full well,</p>
			<p class="t0">And known by Horant of Daneland,<span class="hst">  </span>a cross upon a sail,</p>
			<p class="t0">With other emblems blazoned,<span class="hst">  </span>that pilgrims did betoken.</p>
			<p class="t0">For such a band of pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>in Wâ-te’s heart was little love bespoken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Loudly Morunc shouted<span class="hst">  </span>to Irold brave and true:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now ask our lord, King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>what he thinks to do?</p>
			<p class="t0">A sail with the arms of Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>comes to our shore too nearly:</p>
			<p class="t0">Too long have we been sleeping,<span class="hst">  </span>and well to be rid of this will cost us dearly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To Hettel the tale was carried<span class="hst">  </span>that the father of his bride,</p>
			<p class="t0">Hither from Ireland sailing,<span class="hst">  </span>with ships broad-built and wide</p>
			<p class="t0">As well as many a galley,<span class="hst">  </span>now their shore was nearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">From Wâ-te and from Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>their wisest thoughts the king was bent on hearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Both those knights of Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>could hardly this believe,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had not their eyes beheld it,<span class="hst">  </span>that Hagen, with followers brave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Seeking his daughter Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>to the river Waal was steering.</p>
			<p class="t0">The men who came from Ortland<span class="hst">  </span>lay happy on the beach, no danger fearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The fair and noble Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>soon heard the wondrous tale,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whereat the kindly maiden<span class="hst">  </span>did loudly thus bewail:</p>
			<p class="t0">“My father, if he comes hither,<span class="hst">  </span>soon will make such slaughter,</p>
			<p class="t0">That none e’er knew the sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>that will be felt by many a wife and daughter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“We ’gainst that can guard us,”<span class="hst">  </span>answered the knight Irold:</p>
			<p class="t0">“However he may bluster,<span class="hst">  </span>I would not take of gold</p>
			<p class="t0">A mountain’s weight in barter,<span class="hst">  </span>that day when foes are mated,</p>
			<p class="t0">Could I see my uncle Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>near wild Hagen come, with anger heated.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>began to wail and mourn.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ship was tossed and rolling,<span class="hst">  </span>now by the west wind borne,</p>
			<p class="t0">With warriors filled and crowded,<span class="hst">  </span>near to Waal, the river.</p>
			<p class="t0">They there, in heavy fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>soon found a blood-stained resting-place forever.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te bade that Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>on board a ship should stay.</p>
			<p class="t0">To guard the queenly maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>while near the shore it lay,</p>
			<p class="t0">On every side all hastily<span class="hst">  </span>men their shields were bearing:</p>
			<p class="t0">To keep a watch o’er the ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>there were on board a hundred warriors daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ready now for battle<span class="hst">  </span>were all who to the strand</p>
			<p class="t0">Had brought the lovely Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>from her Irish fatherland,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whence they the maid had stolen,<span class="hst">  </span>to her father Hagen’s sorrow.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many, sound and healthy,<span class="hst">  </span>must sorely fear for their lives before the morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel was soon heard shouting<span class="hst">  </span>and calling aloud to his men:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Be on your guard, brave fighters!<span class="hst">  </span>Who never gold did gain,</p>
			<p class="t0">To him it shall be measured,<span class="hst">  </span>in handfuls, without weighing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Let this be not forgotten,—<span class="hst">  </span>that now your Irish foes you may be slaying.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Bearing then their weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>down they rushed to the sand;</p>
			<p class="t0">Stirred with warlike bustle<span class="hst">  </span>was all the Waalisch strand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thither to King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>flocked his champions daring;</p>
			<p class="t0">Friends as well as foemen<span class="hst">  </span>soon towards the self-same spot were faring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now had Hagen also<span class="hst">  </span>reached the sandy shore,</p>
			<p class="t0">And men at him were hurling<span class="hst">  </span>the spears they bravely bore:</p>
			<p class="t0">Those upon the seashore<span class="hst">  </span>well their lives then guarded</p>
			<p class="t0">From the stormy Irish onset;<span class="hst">  </span>but wounds yet all the more their bravery rewarded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">How seldom would a father<span class="hst">  </span>have wished to send his child</p>
			<p class="t0">Where sparks of fire, all-glowing,<span class="hst">  </span>were struck by foemen wild</p>
			<p class="t0">Forth from hardened helmets,<span class="hst">  </span>in sight of many a maiden!</p>
			<p class="t0">To have sailed with these roving fighters<span class="hst">  </span>did now at last the lovely Hilda sadden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By turns they smote each other<span class="hst">  </span>with heavy spears and long:</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ themselves they guarded<span class="hst">  </span>beneath their bucklers strong,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet wounded thro’ their hauberks,<span class="hst">  </span>they were gashed and bloody;</p>
			<p class="t0">And soon with flowing life-blood<span class="hst">  </span>the waters’ depths were deeply stained and ruddy.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to his trusty liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>Hagen called aloud:</p>
			<p class="t0">The sea gave back his shouting,—<span class="hst">  </span>truly his strength was good,—</p>
			<p class="t0">He bade them help to land him,<span class="hst">  </span>their wounds by them unheeded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Glad were they to do it:<span class="hst">  </span>thereby were spears in many hearts imbedded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen now drew nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>not far was he from the sand;</p>
			<p class="t0">His sword it clattered loudly;<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel, near at hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Was standing by the water,<span class="hst">  </span>on the seashore waiting:</p>
			<p class="t0">There, with daring followers,<span class="hst">  </span>deeds he did that praise should aye be meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen, wild with anger,<span class="hst">  </span>leaped into the wave,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to the shore he waded.<span class="hst">  </span>Then on that warrior brave</p>
			<p class="t0">Came a shower of lances;<span class="hst">  </span>like snowflakes falling thickly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Fast they fell around him,<span class="hst">  </span>shot by the Hegeling foemen, thronging quickly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then from the clash of sword-blades<span class="hst">  </span>a mighty noise arose.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who would slay wild Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>soon beneath his blows</p>
			<p class="t0">Were seen to reel and stagger.<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel, the noble fighter,</p>
			<p class="t0">Drew near to Hilda’s father;<span class="hst">  </span>at this the maiden wept, with tears most bitter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">It was indeed a wonder,<span class="hst">  </span>as we the tale have heard,</p>
			<p class="t0">So strong and brave was Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>that Hettel, the Hegeling lord,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before him held his footing.<span class="hst">  </span>As soon as, wildly fighting,</p>
			<p class="t0">They had reached each other,<span class="hst">  </span>their helmets rang beneath the heavy smiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But not so quickly ended<span class="hst">  </span>was yet the stormy fight.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon was Hettel wounded<span class="hst">  </span>by brave King Hagen’s might:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te the old of Sturmland,<span class="hst">  </span>with his kin, to Hettel hasted,</p>
			<p class="t0">With Irold, too, and Morunc,—<span class="hst">  </span>knights as good as foemen’s lands e’er wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now came the brave old Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>and Wâ-te with his throng:</p>
			<p class="t0">Knights there were a thousand,—<span class="hst">  </span>the press of them was strong.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel’s Hegeling kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>well their weapons plying,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wounded many foemen;<span class="hst">  </span>on every side stretched low, the men were lying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After bravest fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>now had reached the land</p>
			<p class="t0">The followers of Hagen;<span class="hst">  </span>then crowded to the sand,</p>
			<p class="t0">After his friends so faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>a host from Ireland’s borders.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon were helmets shattered:<span class="hst">  </span>grimly they fought to win the maids from their warders.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen saw then near him<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel, the youthful knight:</p>
			<p class="t0">Many strong and stalwart<span class="hst">  </span>were shorn of strength outright,</p>
			<p class="t0">Both by those from Daneland<span class="hst">  </span>and the Hegeling lieges:</p>
			<p class="t0">Now to meet wild Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>every one old Wâ-te loud beseeches.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then, by his strength, King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>broke thro’ the crowd a path,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with his sword hewed boldly;<span class="hst">  </span>well he wreaked his wrath,</p>
			<p class="t0">Because his much-loved daughter<span class="hst">  </span>from him by craft was taken;</p>
			<p class="t0">Coats of mail lay fallen:<span class="hst">  </span>the wrongs of Hagen hate in him did waken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He might not quench his anger<span class="hst">  </span>with the sword alone;</p>
			<p class="t0">By the thrust of his heavy long-spear<span class="hst">  </span>soon were overthrown</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a knight most daring:<span class="hst">  </span>never the tale was given</p>
			<p class="t0">By these unto their kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>of how in the stormy fight their luck had thriven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now came Wâ-te quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>the knight well born and good;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon of his well-loved kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>he saw the flowing blood,</p>
			<p class="t0">Under the slash of broadswords,<span class="hst">  </span>out of their armor dripping:</p>
			<p class="t0">Of those who would have helped him,<span class="hst">  </span>five hundred wounded men in death were sleeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Everywhere were gathered<span class="hst">  </span>friends as well as foes,</p>
			<p class="t0">All in uproar minged;<span class="hst">  </span>a mighty din arose.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te and wild Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>rushed on each other madly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoe’er could shun their pathway<span class="hst">  </span>of all the risk he had fled was thinking gladly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen laid on Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>many a heavy blow,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Well his strength he wielded.<span class="hst">  </span>Their helmets were aglow</p>
			<p class="t0">With fiery sparks outflashing,—<span class="hst">  </span>like to brands they glittered;</p>
			<p class="t0">Each cleft the other’s helmet,<span class="hst">  </span>and ever still, each other’s blows they bettered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The ground beneath was trembling<span class="hst">  </span>with aged Wâ-te’s stroke:</p>
			<p class="t0">Scarcely could the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>of his onslaught shun the shock.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the wounds of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>his faithful friends were binding;</p>
			<p class="t0">He then began to ask them<span class="hst">  </span>where his cousin Wâ-te he could be finding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With Hagen, “of kings the Devil,”<span class="hst">  </span>he found old Wâ-te soon:</p>
			<p class="t0">The skill of him of Sturmland<span class="hst">  </span>to guard himself was shown:</p>
			<p class="t0">Brave were both these warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>and oft the tale was spoken</p>
			<p class="t0">How Wâ-te the bold and Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>in hardest strife had each his anger wroken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen’s spear was broken<span class="hst">  </span>erelong on Wâ-te’s shield:</p>
			<p class="t0">Well in the fight he bore it,<span class="hst">  </span>and strength enough did wield.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er on the field of warfare<span class="hst">  </span>did blows of men fall thicker,</p>
			<p class="t0">Even of bravest warriors;<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te scorned to flinch, or seem the worker.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen cleft the head-piece<span class="hst">  </span>of Hettel’s brave old man,</p>
			<p class="t0">The trusty, daring Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>till blood from his helmet ran,</p>
			<p class="t0">From out his wounds fast flowing.<span class="hst">  </span>Now the wind blew colder,</p>
			<p class="t0">For eventide was nearing;<span class="hst">  </span>the struggling throng in fight but grew the bolder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te gave back in anger<span class="hst">  </span>each grim and deadly blow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Making the blood, like tear-drops,<span class="hst">  </span>on Hagen’s breast to flow;</p>
			<p class="t0">Strokes he gave his foeman,<span class="hst">  </span>until the sword-blade glittered</p>
			<p class="t0">On the bosses of his helmet;<span class="hst">  </span>daylight before his darkened eyesight flittered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wounded, too, was Irold,<span class="hst">  </span>Ortland’s champion brave.</p>
			<p class="t0">Though many there lay dying<span class="hst">  </span>from the wounds that Hagen gave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet the blows of Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>still did Hagen batter.</p>
			<p class="t0">Sorely wept the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>when of so many swords they heard the clatter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now, in fear and sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>Hilda, the maiden fair,</p>
			<p class="t0">Cried unto King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>and begged of him to spare</p>
			<p class="t0">Her father from old Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>the fight so grimly waging.</p>
			<p class="t0">He called for his standard-bearer,<span class="hst">  </span>and bade him lead his men where the strife was raging.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the kingly Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>right well and bravely fought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon he found old Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>to whom no joy it brought:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Hettel called to Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Let hatred hence be driven;</p>
			<p class="t0">So shall it raise your honor,<span class="hst">  </span>if now our friends no more to death be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen shouted loudly,—<span class="hst">  </span>fell indeed was his mood,—</p>
			<p class="t0">“Who bids that we be parted?”<span class="hst">  </span>Then cried the warrior good:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I bid it, I, King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>the Hegelings’ lord and master,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who for the Lady Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>sent my friends so far, from you to wrest her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the lordly Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Since first to me ’twas told</p>
			<p class="t0">How you to win my daughter<span class="hst">  </span>showed yourself so bold,</p>
			<p class="t0">This to your name with warriors<span class="hst">  </span>shame has ne’er been doing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Clever was the cunning<span class="hst">  </span>to which your winning of my child is owing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel then sprang nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>as oft by one is done,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who thinks to stop the fighting.<span class="hst">  </span>Grim was the mood yet shown</p>
			<p class="t0">By the bold and aged Wâ-te;<span class="hst">  </span>but he and Hagen yielded:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then with all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>Hagen stepped back, nor longer his weapon wielded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the lordly Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>his helmet laid aside;</p>
			<p class="t0">A truce was loudly called for<span class="hst">  </span>by all, both far and wide;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas said by Hilda’s father<span class="hst">  </span>there was an end of fighting:</p>
			<p class="t0">For many a day, the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>had heard no tale their ears so much delighting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The men took off the armor<span class="hst">  </span>which they in fight had worn,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now at last they rested.<span class="hst">  </span>Many then must mourn</p>
			<p class="t0">For wounds, in warfare given,<span class="hst">  </span>whence the blood was welling;</p>
			<p class="t0">But many lay there also<span class="hst">  </span>who never more on thoughts of war were dwelling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then stepped forth King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>and near to Hagen stood,</p>
			<p class="t0">And thus he spake to the warrior:<span class="hst">  </span>“Since I well have wooed</p>
			<p class="t0">Your lovely daughter Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>’tis fit that you allow her</p>
			<p class="t0">To wear the crown beside me:<span class="hst">  </span>my many well-bred knights will fealty show her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Hettel sent for Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>of whom he was in need;</p>
			<p class="t0">For many years now ended,<span class="hst">  </span>of him it had been said</p>
			<p class="t0">That he from some wild woman<span class="hst">  </span>had learned a leech’s cunning:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, forsooth, was skilful<span class="hst">  </span>to heal deep wounds and stanch the life-blood running.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te laid by his weapons;<span class="hst">  </span>his wounds he first had bound.</p>
			<p class="t0">Herbs that were good for healing<span class="hst">  </span>by him were quickly found;</p>
			<p class="t0">He had a box full costly,<span class="hst">  </span>that in it held a plaster.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the fair Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>besought his help, and at his feet she cast her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said, “My dear friend Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>my father heal, I pray;</p>
			<p class="t0">For this, whate’er you ask me,<span class="hst">  </span>I ne’er will say you nay;</p>
			<p class="t0">And help his warriors also,<span class="hst">  </span>who in the dust lie bleeding,</p>
			<p class="t0">And show your skill to his liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>who stood by him, when he their help was needing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Nor must you be forgetful<span class="hst">  </span>of those of the Hegeling land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who were friends to Hettel;<span class="hst">  </span>wet with their blood is the sand</p>
			<p class="t0">On which they now are lying,<span class="hst">  </span>as if a rain were falling:</p>
			<p class="t0">Sorrowful tales of their fighting<span class="hst">  </span>for me there ne’er can be an end of telling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Their wounds I cannot heal,—</p>
			<p class="t0">In that I will not meddle,<span class="hst">  </span>until as friends they feel</p>
			<p class="t0">Each unto the other,—<span class="hst">  </span>Hagen brave and knightly,</p>
			<p class="t0">And Hettel, my lord and master;<span class="hst">  </span>till then shall I withhold my skill most rightly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high-born maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“This I may not dare</p>
			<p class="t0">To ask of the king, my father;<span class="hst">  </span>his tears I did not spare,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now have not the boldness<span class="hst">  </span>to bring to him my greeting;</p>
			<p class="t0">Both he and all his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>I fear would now my love with scorn be meeting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then ’twas asked of Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“My lord, may this now be,</p>
			<p class="t0">That it would not stir your anger<span class="hst">  </span>your daughter here to see,</p>
			<p class="t0">The youthful, queenly Hilda?<span class="hst">  </span>If you for this are willing,</p>
			<p class="t0">She will come most gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon your many wounds will help in healing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Gladly will I see her,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever she has done;</p>
			<p class="t0">To me will she be welcome:<span class="hst">  </span>why should I her disown,</p>
			<p class="t0">Here in a land of foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>nor take her greeting kindly?</p>
			<p class="t0">To me and to my daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>King Hettel must atone for deeds unfriendly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Horant, the knight from Daneland,<span class="hst">  </span>led her by the hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with him went brave Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>to where the king did stand;</p>
			<p class="t0">One maiden only with them<span class="hst">  </span>looked on Hagen wounded.</p>
			<p class="t0">For friends did Hilda sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>though Hettel’s love for her was all unbounded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On Hildeburg and Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>when Hagen now did look,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, from his seat upspringing,<span class="hst">  </span>thus he quickly spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Welcome be thou, my daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>Hilda, most noble lady!</p>
			<p class="t0">I cannot leave unspoken<span class="hst">  </span>the greeting warm which I to give am ready.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His daughter he allowed not<span class="hst">  </span>the care of his wounds to take;</p>
			<p class="t0">While Wâ-te these was binding<span class="hst">  </span>he bade the maids step back,—</p>
			<p class="t0">The youthful high-born ladies.<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te’s wish was the stronger</p>
			<p class="t0">To heal her father quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>that so his daughter there might weep no longer.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Healed with plants and herbage<span class="hst">  </span>and many a far-sought weed,</p>
			<p class="t0">From all his pain did Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>feel himself now freed;</p>
			<p class="t0">They eased his hurts with plaster,<span class="hst">  </span>and when again the maiden</p>
			<p class="t0">Turned to see her father,<span class="hst">  </span>she found him well, with aches no longer laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, the healing-master,<span class="hst">  </span>made haste,—no time he lost;</p>
			<p class="t0">He hoped to gain such riches<span class="hst">  </span>among this wounded host,</p>
			<p class="t0">That scarce could they by camels<span class="hst">  </span>be carried to his dwelling.</p>
			<p class="t0">A skill so great and wondrous<span class="hst">  </span>never, that I have heard, have men been telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First he healed King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>the lord of the Hegeling land;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then all he saw there wounded<span class="hst">  </span>he helped by his skilful hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those in the care of others<span class="hst">  </span>still with pain did sicken;</p>
			<p class="t0">But they, when nursed by Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>were turned to life, tho’ they by death were stricken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There would they no longer<span class="hst">  </span>let the maidens stay.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen said to Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“Elsewhere must we to-day</p>
			<p class="t0">Find us rest and shelter;<span class="hst">  </span>while others must not idly</p>
			<p class="t0">Leave the dead thus lying,<span class="hst">  </span>who burial scarce can wait, here scattered widely.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel begged King Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>with him to his home to go;</p>
			<p class="t0">Though loath, to this he yielded,<span class="hst">  </span>as soon as he came to know</p>
			<p class="t0">That he, the king of the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>of many lands was owner:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hagen then with his daughter<span class="hst">  </span>went with him to his home, and there had honor.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The youthful knights were singing,<span class="hst">  </span>as they left the field.</p>
			<p class="t0">Happy then were the living;<span class="hst">  </span>but, never to be healed,</p>
			<p class="t0">They behind were leaving<span class="hst">  </span>three hundred dead and dying,</p>
			<p class="t0">The rich and poor together,<span class="hst">  </span>slashed with the sword, and pitifully lying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the war-worn fighters<span class="hst">  </span>through the land went home;</p>
			<p class="t0">All who there were dwelling<span class="hst">  </span>were blithe to see them come:</p>
			<p class="t0">But the kinsmen of the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>who in death lay sleeping</p>
			<p class="t0">Were slow their hearts to gladden;<span class="hst">  </span>they for kindred slain long time were weeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel and Hilda with him<span class="hst">  </span>took their homeward way.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many, bereft of fathers,<span class="hst">  </span>sorely wept that day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whose after life was happy.<span class="hst">  </span>The mighty Hettel later</p>
			<p class="t0">Crowned the fair young Hilda;<span class="hst">  </span>by this the Hegeling name became the greater.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel now had thriven,—<span class="hst">  </span>his suit he well did gain.</p>
			<p class="t0">Old and young together<span class="hst">  </span>with swords at court were seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">As were the guests of Hagen who from the ships came kindly.</p>
			<p class="t0">The wedding of his daughter<span class="hst">  </span>was highly praised by Hagen, now grown friendly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then with what great honor<span class="hst">  </span>to the bridal seat was led</p>
			<p class="t0">That high-born, lovely lady!<span class="hst">  </span>Moreover, it is said</p>
			<p class="t0">That full five hundred liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>then at court were knighted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Fru-te the wise from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>to guard King Hettel’s wealth was thought well fitted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The riches of King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>by Hagen now were seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">The tale had erst been told him<span class="hst">  </span>by many of Hettel’s kin,</p>
			<p class="t0">That over seven princedoms<span class="hst">  </span>well his sway had thriven.</p>
			<p class="t0">All the poor there with them<span class="hst">  </span>were home in gladness sent, and lodgings given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel gave rich clothing<span class="hst">  </span>to Ireland’s warriors brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">Bright-red gold and silver,<span class="hst">  </span>and horses, too, he gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">The whole they scarce could carry,<span class="hst">  </span>as they homeward wended:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus good friends he won him,<span class="hst">  </span>and this for Hilda in highest praises ended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon the twelfth day’s morning<span class="hst">  </span>they left King Hettel’s land.</p>
			<p class="t0">The horses bred in Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>led they out on the sand;</p>
			<p class="t0">Each his mane, thick hanging,<span class="hst">  </span>down to his hoofs was shaking.</p>
			<p class="t0">The guests from afar were happy<span class="hst">  </span>that they King Hettel’s friendship had been making.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Grooms and also stewards<span class="hst">  </span>with Hagen then did ride,</p>
			<p class="t0">With cup-bearers and carvers.<span class="hst">  </span>Ne’er, in his greatest pride,</p>
			<p class="t0">In his home and kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>had he been served so truly.</p>
			<p class="t0">The crown was worn by Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hagen’s heart with bliss was brimming fully.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Food as well as lodgings<span class="hst">  </span>they found upon their road;</p>
			<p class="t0">On Hagen and his followers<span class="hst">  </span>all men their care bestowed:</p>
			<p class="t0">So to their homes most gladly<span class="hst">  </span>they the tale did carry</p>
			<p class="t0">Of how the friends of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>in showing them all kindness ne’er were weary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen greeted Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>and clasped her in his arms;</p>
			<p class="t0">He said, “Watch over Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>for the love your bosom warms.</p>
			<p class="t0">So great a throng of followers<span class="hst">  </span>at times a woman dazes;</p>
			<p class="t0">Care for her so kindly<span class="hst">  </span>that of your worth all men shall speak with praises.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“My lord, that will I gladly:<span class="hst">  </span>to you has much been told</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the woes that with her mother<span class="hst">  </span>I bore in days of old;</p>
			<p class="t0">And I for years my friendship<span class="hst">  </span>for her did never loosen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Her for miles I followed<span class="hst">  </span>ere for a lover you by her were chosen.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hagen bade the others<span class="hst">  </span>their way to court to take;</p>
			<p class="t0">Never then could the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>an end of weeping make:</p>
			<p class="t0">Now by the hand he took them,<span class="hst">  </span>and to Hettel they were given;</p>
			<p class="t0">He asked for them his kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>since from their homes they sadly had been riven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said he to his daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“So well the crown now wear,</p>
			<p class="t0">That neither I nor your mother<span class="hst">  </span>the tale shall ever hear</p>
			<p class="t0">That men ill-will do bear you.<span class="hst">  </span>High your lot has raised you,</p>
			<p class="t0">And you of blame were worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>if when men spoke your name they never praised you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Low bowed to the king wild Hagen,<span class="hst">  </span>and kissed his child again.</p>
			<p class="t0">Neither by him nor his followers<span class="hst">  </span>ever more was seen</p>
			<p class="t0">The kingdom of the Hegeling:<span class="hst">  </span>too far away was their dwelling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Back to his home in Ballian,<span class="hst">  </span>in his trusty ships, King Hagen soon was sailing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he had reached his castle,<span class="hst">  </span>and sat with the queen alone,</p>
			<p class="t0">The mother of fair Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>Hagen was free to own</p>
			<p class="t0">That none to win his daughter<span class="hst">  </span>more fitly could have pleaded;</p>
			<p class="t0">And if he had yet others,<span class="hst">  </span>he fain to the Hegeling land would send them to be wedded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hilda for this gave praises<span class="hst">  </span>to her master, Christ the Lord:</p>
			<p class="t0">“That I of my dear daughter<span class="hst">  </span>such happy news have heard</p>
			<p class="t0">Fills my heart with gladness,<span class="hst">  </span>and with bliss o’erflowing.</p>
			<p class="t0">How fares it with her followers,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hildeburg, who long her love was showing?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the kingly Hagen:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now in their land and home</p>
			<p class="t0">All of them are happy;<span class="hst">  </span>great hath our child become;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er, with us, were her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>clothed in such fine dresses.</p>
			<p class="t0">There we now must leave them:<span class="hst">  </span>for her were many breastplates hacked to pieces.”</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c9">Tale the Ninth.<br/><span class="small">HOW GUDRUN WAS SOUGHT BY SIEGFRIED.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">We speak no more of Hagen.<span class="hst">  </span>A word may now be told</p>
			<p class="t0">About King Hettel’s kinsmen:<span class="hst">  </span>they who land did hold</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever owed him fealty<span class="hst">  </span>for these and for their castles;</p>
			<p class="t0">To court they all came often<span class="hst">  </span>when Hettel and Hilda sent to call their vassals.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te went to Sturmland,<span class="hst">  </span>Morunc to Nifland rode;</p>
			<p class="t0">Horant, prince of Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>led his warriors good</p>
			<p class="t0">To Givers, by the seashore,<span class="hst">  </span>where as lord they held him;</p>
			<p class="t0">There their homes they guarded,<span class="hst">  </span>and many, far and wide, their master called him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With mighty sway in Ortland<span class="hst">  </span>Irold had his seat;</p>
			<p class="t0">Its lands he held of Hettel;<span class="hst">  </span>so, as a vassal meet,</p>
			<p class="t0">Near and far to serve him,<span class="hst">  </span>his duty was the greater:</p>
			<p class="t0">The king was brave and worthy;<span class="hst">  </span>and ne’er for a lord of lands was known a better.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">If ever in any kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel heard them speak</p>
			<p class="t0">Of a fair and well-born maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>her he sought to take</p>
			<p class="t0">Into his home and castle,<span class="hst">  </span>as handmaid to his lady:</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever Hilda wished for,<span class="hst">  </span>to help wild Hagen’s child they all were ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king, with his wife beside him,<span class="hst">  </span>was happy on the throne;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their life was ever blissful.<span class="hst">  </span>To all in the land ’twas known</p>
			<p class="t0">That better far and dearer<span class="hst">  </span>than all on earth he thought her.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never by all his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>a lovelier could be found, where’er they sought her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Within seven years thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel, in stormy fight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thrice to his foes gave battle.<span class="hst">  </span>They who, day and night,</p>
			<p class="t0">To wrong his name and honor<span class="hst">  </span>did their utmost gladly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now by the knightly Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>found themselves brought low and chastened sadly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His castles he did strengthen,<span class="hst">  </span>and peace he gave to his land,</p>
			<p class="t0">As well a king befitteth:<span class="hst">  </span>such were the deeds of his hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">That never in any kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>when his name was spoken,</p>
			<p class="t0">Was it said he was faint-hearted.<span class="hst">  </span>The praise of all did well his worth betoken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While, with name so worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel held the throne,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, the man of wisdom,<span class="hst">  </span>never left undone</p>
			<p class="t0">His duty to his master,<span class="hst">  </span>to see him three times yearly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Truly he was faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>far and near, to the lord he held so dearly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Horant, the lord from Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>to court not seldom rode;</p>
			<p class="t0">Costly gems and clothing<span class="hst">  </span>on the maids he there bestowed,</p>
			<p class="t0">With gold and silken raiment,<span class="hst">  </span>meet for women’s wearing:</p>
			<p class="t0">He from Daneland brought them,<span class="hst">  </span>and to all who wished was he of gifts unsparing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The service true and steady<span class="hst">  </span>that the liegemen of the king</p>
			<p class="t0">Gave to the lordly Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>honor to him did bring.</p>
			<p class="t0">Praised was he for knighthood<span class="hst">  </span>more than any other:</p>
			<p class="t0">This Hilda also furthered,<span class="hst">  </span>a queen herself, and child of a queenly mother.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hilda, Hagen’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>children two did bear</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto her lord, King Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>to bring them up with care</p>
			<p class="t0">His faithful friends were bidden.<span class="hst">  </span>Soon among his vassals</p>
			<p class="t0">Were the tidings bruited<span class="hst">  </span>that an heir no more was lacking for his lands and castles.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One became a warrior,<span class="hst">  </span>Ortwin was his name;</p>
			<p class="t0">To Wâ-te he was trusted.<span class="hst">  </span>It was the teacher’s aim</p>
			<p class="t0">That he from early boyhood<span class="hst">  </span>should his thoughts be turning</p>
			<p class="t0">To all things good and worthy;<span class="hst">  </span>to be a trusty knight he thus was learning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The very comely daughter<span class="hst">  </span>of Hilda and the king</p>
			<p class="t0">Was called Gu-drun the lovely:<span class="hst">  </span>from the land of the Hegeling</p>
			<p class="t0">To Denmark she was carried,<span class="hst">  </span>to be in her kinsmen’s wardship.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus they helped King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>and this they never felt to be a hardship.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the maid grew older,<span class="hst">  </span>her shape became so fair</p>
			<p class="t0">That neither man nor woman<span class="hst">  </span>to praise her could forbear:</p>
			<p class="t0">Far from the maiden’s birthplace,<span class="hst">  </span>all her worth were telling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun her kinsfolk called her,<span class="hst">  </span>in the Danish land where now she had her dwelling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">That age she now was reaching<span class="hst">  </span>when, had she been a man,</p>
			<p class="t0">A sword she might have wielded.<span class="hst">  </span>Many a prince was fain</p>
			<p class="t0">To wed the lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>and sought her love and favor;</p>
			<p class="t0">But many came a-wooing<span class="hst">  </span>who soon their hopes must lose, and win her never.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">However fair was Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel’s lovely wife,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet was Gu-drun more lovely,<span class="hst">  </span>and fair beyond belief;</p>
			<p class="t0">More fair than the early Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>erst to Ireland carried.</p>
			<p class="t0">Above all other women<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun was praised, ere yet the maid was married.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Her father scorned to give her<span class="hst">  </span>to the king of Alzabé;</p>
			<p class="t0">When he heard he could not win her<span class="hst">  </span>to him ’twas a sorry day.</p>
			<p class="t0">He held himself most highly<span class="hst">  </span>for all his kingly graces,</p>
			<p class="t0">And thought there could be no one<span class="hst">  </span>whose deeds, like his, were worthy of men’s praises.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Both brave he was and daring,<span class="hst">  </span>and from the Moorland came:</p>
			<p class="t0">He was known afar and widely,<span class="hst">  </span>Siegfried was his name;</p>
			<p class="t0">A king was he full mighty<span class="hst">  </span>over vassals seven.</p>
			<p class="t0">He sued for Hilda’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>such tales of her lofty worth to him were given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He, with his faithful liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>from far Icaria’s strand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Won many costly prizes<span class="hst">  </span>there in Hettel’s land:</p>
			<p class="t0">His strong and doughty warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>in sight of ladies seated</p>
			<p class="t0">Before King Hettel’s castle,<span class="hst">  </span>in games of knighthood often there were mated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Hilda and her daughter<span class="hst">  </span>passed the hall within,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before the house of Wigaleis<span class="hst">  </span>there rose a mighty din</p>
			<p class="t0">From warriors of the Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>who, all boldly dashing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Rode in the sight of the women;<span class="hst">  </span>oft of spears and shields was heard the clashing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Never could knight in tilting<span class="hst">  </span>better in this behave.</p>
			<p class="t0">A friendly will she bore him,<span class="hst">  </span>and oft kind words she gave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Though he was brown to look on,<span class="hst">  </span>and in hue was dusky even.</p>
			<p class="t0">He for her love was yearning,<span class="hst">  </span>yet for a wife she ne’er to him was given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">This pained him beyond measure,<span class="hst">  </span>and truly he was wroth</p>
			<p class="t0">That he from far had ridden,<span class="hst">  </span>yet gave she not her troth.</p>
			<p class="t0">To burn the land of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>then did he threaten madly:</p>
			<p class="t0">His followers from Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>when now his hopes were lost, were mourning sadly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">From him was the maid withholden<span class="hst">  </span>by Hettel’s lofty pride;</p>
			<p class="t0">And now their loving friendship<span class="hst">  </span>was ended on either side.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then swore the Moor that never<span class="hst">  </span>he his hate would slacken,</p>
			<p class="t0">And that the grudge he bore him,<span class="hst">  </span>whate’er befell, should never be forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then from the land of the Hegeling<span class="hst">  </span>rode they all away.</p>
			<p class="t0">When many years were ended,<span class="hst">  </span>there came at last a day</p>
			<p class="t0">When by a knight most worthy<span class="hst">  </span>was bitter sorrow tasted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the foes of Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>did him the worst they could, nor in it rested.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c10">Tale the Tenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HARTMUT SENT TO WOO GUDRUN.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now in the land of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>the tale was widely told,</p>
			<p class="t0">That never fairer maiden<span class="hst">  </span>did any man behold</p>
			<p class="t0">Than was King Hettel’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun, the high-born lady.</p>
			<p class="t0">A king, whose name was Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>to her then turned his love, to woo her ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gerlind, Hartmut’s mother,<span class="hst">  </span>her wish to him made known,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he should woo the maiden;<span class="hst">  </span>her word he followed soon.</p>
			<p class="t0">First they sent for his father,<span class="hst">  </span>when they of this had spoken;</p>
			<p class="t0">He bore the name of Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>and in Norman lands he wore the kingly token.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the aged father<span class="hst">  </span>rode to see his son.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the end that he was seeking<span class="hst">  </span>had Ludwig knowledge won;</p>
			<p class="t0">But when to him he hearkened,<span class="hst">  </span>and learned his wishes wholly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Evil he foreboded,<span class="hst">  </span>yet still the youth’s fond hopes upheld he fully.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Who tells you,” said King Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>“she is so very fair?</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ she all lands were owning,<span class="hst">  </span>the home is not so near,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wherein the maid is dwelling,<span class="hst">  </span>that we should go a-wooing;</p>
			<p class="t0">If we sent our men before us<span class="hst">  </span>to ask her love, their task they would soon be ruing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then did Hartmut answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“For me ’tis not too far;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whene’er the lord of a kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>no pain or toil doth spare</p>
			<p class="t0">To win a wife and riches,<span class="hst">  </span>he gains a life-long blessing.</p>
			<p class="t0">My wish, I pray you, follow;<span class="hst">  </span>let men be sent, that they my suit be pressing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake his mother, Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>of Normandy the queen:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Letters must now be written;<span class="hst">  </span>let clothes, the best e’er seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">With gold, to those be given<span class="hst">  </span>upon your errand speeding;</p>
			<p class="t0">They, too, must learn the roadways<span class="hst">  </span>that towards the home of fair Gu-drun are leading.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake again King Ludwig:<span class="hst">  </span>“Know you not full well</p>
			<p class="t0">That Hilda, the maiden’s mother,<span class="hst">  </span>did erst in Ireland dwell?</p>
			<p class="t0">And know you not what happened<span class="hst">  </span>to many a one who sought her?</p>
			<p class="t0">Her kin are proud and lofty,<span class="hst">  </span>and now will scorn the love we shall have brought her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then young Hartmut answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Tho’ with a warlike band</p>
			<p class="t0">I afar must seek her,<span class="hst">  </span>over sea and land,</p>
			<p class="t0">That shall I do most willingly:<span class="hst">  </span>my heart to her is given,</p>
			<p class="t0">And never will I rest me<span class="hst">  </span>till I for Hilda’s daughter happily have striven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Gladly will I help you,”<span class="hst">  </span>King Ludwig then did say:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Let this now make you happy;<span class="hst">  </span>erelong, upon the way</p>
			<p class="t0">I’ll send twelve sumpter-horses<span class="hst">  </span>bearing silver treasure;</p>
			<p class="t0">That when they hear our errand,<span class="hst">  </span>our wealth and worth they may more rightly measure.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By Hartmut then were chosen<span class="hst">  </span>sixty men, to send</p>
			<p class="t0">To woo the fair young maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>and help to him to lend;</p>
			<p class="t0">With food and clothing also<span class="hst">  </span>well were they outfitted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And on the road well guided:<span class="hst">  </span>Ludwig was wise, and was in this foresighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When everything was ready<span class="hst">  </span>that soon the men would need,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then were letters written,<span class="hst">  </span>sealed, and given with speed,</p>
			<p class="t0">Both by brave young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>and his queenly mother.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then from home they started;<span class="hst">  </span>so proud a throng there never was another.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Fast they rode and steadily<span class="hst">  </span>for many a day and night,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until the land they sought for<span class="hst">  </span>came at last in sight,</p>
			<p class="t0">And they might tell the errand<span class="hst">  </span>they were thither bringing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Long was Hartmut waiting,<span class="hst">  </span>while love and care were in his heart upspringing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Over land and rivers<span class="hst">  </span>they took their toilsome way,</p>
			<p class="t0">As far as in days a hundred<span class="hst">  </span>a pasturing herd may stray,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until the land of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>lay before them stretching.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their steeds were worn and weary<span class="hst">  </span>ere they gave the letters they were fetching.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last they far had ridden,<span class="hst">  </span>and to the sea had come,</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the shores of Denmark:<span class="hst">  </span>sadly they long did roam,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before they reached the kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>and its lord did know them;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now they begged for guidance,<span class="hst">  </span>and men were bid the nearest way to show them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The news was given to Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>the knight well-bred and bold;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now asked the errand-bearers,<span class="hst">  </span>and the truth to them was told,</p>
			<p class="t0">About King Hettel and Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>and all they had been hearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">They saw the men of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>coming in throngs, their shields and weapons bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Horant, lord of Daneland,<span class="hst">  </span>then to his liegemen spake,</p>
			<p class="t0">And bade for the errand-bearers<span class="hst">  </span>a safeguard now to make,</p>
			<p class="t0">And that the men of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>should be by them well guided</p>
			<p class="t0">To the court of his lord, King Hettel;<span class="hst">  </span>they grudged no toil, and well his bidding heeded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When thro’ the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>the heralds took their way,</p>
			<p class="t0">So lordly was their bearing,<span class="hst">  </span>that often men did say:</p>
			<p class="t0">“These folk are rich and mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever they are seeking.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The news to the king was carried,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon to him all men the tale were speaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To all the guests from Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>were lodgings given there;</p>
			<p class="t0">The king now bade his liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>to wait on them with care.</p>
			<p class="t0">He knew not yet their errand,<span class="hst">  </span>and why to him they had ridden;</p>
			<p class="t0">But on the twelfth day, early,<span class="hst">  </span>young Hartmut’s men before the king were bidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">An earl there was among them;<span class="hst">  </span>how well his breeding showed!</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon their clothing also<span class="hst">  </span>were praises high bestowed;</p>
			<p class="t0">They rode the best of horses<span class="hst">  </span>on which men e’er were seated,</p>
			<p class="t0">And before the king they gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>in fairest guise, that well they might be greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king gave kindly welcome,<span class="hst">  </span>as also did his men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until their wooing errand<span class="hst">  </span>was unto him made plain:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then were they ill-treated,<span class="hst">  </span>and knew the king’s hard feeling.</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween the mighty Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>to grant young Hartmut’s wish would ne’er be willing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One who in that was skilful<span class="hst">  </span>to the king the letters read;</p>
			<p class="t0">But he was greatly angered<span class="hst">  </span>that they to court were led</p>
			<p class="t0">By the good and upright Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>a knight so brave and noble;</p>
			<p class="t0">And, had they not his friendship,<span class="hst">  </span>they had not left the king without more trouble.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake to them King Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“No good to you ’twill bring</p>
			<p class="t0">That you were sent a-wooing<span class="hst">  </span>by Hartmut, your lord and king.</p>
			<p class="t0">To pay for this full dearly<span class="hst">  </span>you may well be fearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Your kingly master’s wishes<span class="hst">  </span>both I and Lady Hilda are wroth at hearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One among them answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hartmut makes it known</p>
			<p class="t0">That much he loves the maiden;<span class="hst">  </span>and if to wear the crown</p>
			<p class="t0">In Normandy she deigneth,<span class="hst">  </span>before his friends there living,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he, a knight all spotless,<span class="hst">  </span>will rightly earn the love she shall be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then quoth the Lady Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“How can she be his wife?</p>
			<p class="t0">A hundred and three of his castles<span class="hst">  </span>his father held in fief,</p>
			<p class="t0">Within the land of Cardigan,<span class="hst">  </span>from Hagen, my noble sire;</p>
			<p class="t0">It ill becomes my kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>to be King Ludwig’s vassals, or owe him hire.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Ludwig dwelt in Scotland,<span class="hst">  </span>and there it erst befell</p>
			<p class="t0">That a brother of King Otto<span class="hst">  </span>did wrong to Ludwig deal:</p>
			<p class="t0">Both were Hagen’s vassals,<span class="hst">  </span>and of him their lands had taken;</p>
			<p class="t0">And thus my father’s friendship<span class="hst">  </span>for him was lost, and hate instead did waken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Say you now to Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>she ne’er his wife shall be.</p>
			<p class="t0">Your lord is not so worthy<span class="hst">  </span>that he to boast is free,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he doth love my daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>and she doth not disdain him;</p>
			<p class="t0">Bid him elsewhere be looking,<span class="hst">  </span>if he be fain a queen for his land to gain him.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The heralds’ hearts were heavy;<span class="hst">  </span>’twas not for their good name</p>
			<p class="t0">That they, for miles full many,<span class="hst">  </span>in sorrow and in shame,</p>
			<p class="t0">Back to their homes in Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>this news must carry sadly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut, as well as Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>was vexed that they herein were foiled so badly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Forthwith to them said Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Tell me now the truth,</p>
			<p class="t0">The grand-daughter of Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>have you seen, forsooth?</p>
			<p class="t0">Is the maid, Gu-drun, as lovely<span class="hst">  </span>as men have here been saying?</p>
			<p class="t0">May God bring shame to Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>that he my suit with such ill-will is paying!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the earl thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“This can I truly say,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoe’er shall see the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>must feel her charms and sway;</p>
			<p class="t0">Above all maids and women,<span class="hst">  </span>her worth is past the telling.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then quoth the kingly Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“To live without her ne’er shall I be willing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whereon his mother, Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>sadly thus did say,</p>
			<p class="t0">With tears her lot bewailing:<span class="hst">  </span>“My son, oh, lack-a-day!</p>
			<p class="t0">Alas that e’er the heralds<span class="hst">  </span>to win the maiden started!</p>
			<p class="t0">If we at home had kept them,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en to this day had I been still light-hearted.”</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c11">Tale the Eleventh.<br/><span class="small">HOW HERWIC SENT TO SEEK GUDRUN AND HOW HARTMUT CAME HIMSELF.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut left his wooing<span class="hst">  </span>to wait for many a year.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon a tale was bruited<span class="hst">  </span>(’twas true what men did hear)</p>
			<p class="t0">Of one whose name was Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>a king as yet but youthful;</p>
			<p class="t0">Often his worth was spoken,<span class="hst">  </span>and men yet speak of him with praises truthful.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He began his wooing,<span class="hst">  </span>trusting the lovely maid</p>
			<p class="t0">Would take him for her lover;<span class="hst">  </span>long his hopes he fed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And much he toiled to win her,<span class="hst">  </span>both with love and riches:</p>
			<p class="t0">But tho’ the maid was willing,<span class="hst">  </span>her father, Hettel, he in vain beseeches.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Though Herwic long was striving,<span class="hst">  </span>and men to seek her rode,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet was his wooing slighted;<span class="hst">  </span>for this his wrath he showed.</p>
			<p class="t0">The heart of proud young Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>by heavy care was fettered;</p>
			<p class="t0">Freely his love he gave her,<span class="hst">  </span>and thought a life with her could not be bettered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There came at length a morning<span class="hst">  </span>when it to them befell</p>
			<p class="t0">That in the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>both knights and maids as well,</p>
			<p class="t0">With many lovely ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>his coming never fearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before them saw bold Hartmut;<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel could not believe he’d be so daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">From this did endless evil<span class="hst">  </span>soon come upon the land:</p>
			<p class="t0">These guests high-born and worthy<span class="hst">  </span>were yet an unknown band;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut and his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>their host’s goodwill were sharing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And he the hope still harbored<span class="hst">  </span>that the maid would yet the crown with him be wearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now before Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>by ladies he was seen</p>
			<p class="t0">To stand with lofty breeding,<span class="hst">  </span>and with a stately mien.</p>
			<p class="t0">There the proud young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>wore a look so knightly,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he the love of ladies<span class="hst">  </span>well might ask, and ’twould be granted rightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Well-grown was he in body,<span class="hst">  </span>fair he was and bold,</p>
			<p class="t0">Kind as well as lordly.<span class="hst">  </span>Why I ne’er was told</p>
			<p class="t0">Had Hettel and Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>from him withheld their daughter,</p>
			<p class="t0">When he had thought to woo her;<span class="hst">  </span>wroth was he to be scorned when now he sought her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of her his heart had longed for<span class="hst">  </span>he now had gained the sight;</p>
			<p class="t0">There oft were stolen glances<span class="hst">  </span>between Gu-drun and the knight.</p>
			<p class="t0">He made it known to the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>by speech from others hidden,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he was young King Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and from the Norman land had lately ridden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then she told her wooer<span class="hst">  </span>the pain to her it gave;</p>
			<p class="t0">And tho’ she wished he ever<span class="hst">  </span>a happy life might have,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet from her father’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>she begged him now to hasten,</p>
			<p class="t0">For in the land of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>was his life at risk, and this would never lessen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She looked on him so kindly<span class="hst">  </span>that now her heart was warned</p>
			<p class="t0">That he should stay no longer,<span class="hst">  </span>for here his suit was spurned.</p>
			<p class="t0">Friendly was she to Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>who her love so wanted,</p>
			<p class="t0">But his hopes she little heeded,<span class="hst">  </span>and while he wooed, not much to him she granted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last her well-bred lover<span class="hst">  </span>from Hettel’s land must go;</p>
			<p class="t0">He bore upon his shoulders<span class="hst">  </span>a heavy load of woe:</p>
			<p class="t0">To wreak his wrath on Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>would he now be choosing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet feared he, if he harmed him,<span class="hst">  </span>that he the maiden’s love would then be losing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">’Twas thus the daring Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>the Hegeling kingdom left;</p>
			<p class="t0">Much he felt of sadness,<span class="hst">  </span>though not of hope bereft.</p>
			<p class="t0">He knew not yet the ending<span class="hst">  </span>of his wooing of the maiden;</p>
			<p class="t0">For the sake of her, thereafter,<span class="hst">  </span>were helmets cleft, and many sorrow-laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he had reached his kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>and home again did turn,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where dwelt his father and mother,<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut, grim and stern,</p>
			<p class="t0">For war with Hettel longing,<span class="hst">  </span>began to make him ready.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gerlind, the old she-devil,<span class="hst">  </span>at all times spurred him on with hatred steady.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c12">Tale the Twelfth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HERWIC MADE WAR ON HETTEL, AND HOW GUDRUN WAS BETROTHED TO HIM.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">What more befell young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>we now forbear to say.</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the brave King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>a weight of sorrow lay,</p>
			<p class="t0">As great as that of Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>for love of the high-born lady.</p>
			<p class="t0">He, with all his kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>to woo Gu-drun, as best they might, made ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Near her he was dwelling,<span class="hst">  </span>and there he held his land.</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand times tho’ daily<span class="hst">  </span>he should send to ask her hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever would his wooing<span class="hst">  </span>be met with scorn and flouting;</p>
			<p class="t0">But though he now was thwarted,<span class="hst">  </span>later on her, as his wife, he was fondly doting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king forbade him longer<span class="hst">  </span>to woo Gu-drun, his child;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then sent he word in anger<span class="hst">  </span>that never would he yield:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel should see him coming,<span class="hst">  </span>with men and shields, a-wooing;</p>
			<p class="t0">And this to him and Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>would evil bring, that they would long be ruing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whose rede it was I know not,<span class="hst">  </span>but thrice a thousand men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Showing thus their friendship,<span class="hst">  </span>were soon with Herwic seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">By them against the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>harm erelong was plotted</p>
			<p class="t0">For the sake of the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>he fondly hoped would be to him allotted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those who came from Sturmland<span class="hst">  </span>the tale would not believe,</p>
			<p class="t0">To those from Denmark also<span class="hst">  </span>none the tidings gave;</p>
			<p class="t0">But Irold, lord of Ortland,<span class="hst">  </span>soon the word was hearing</p>
			<p class="t0">That now the daring Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>for warlike ends to Hettel’s home was faring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When ’twas known to Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>that Herwic, fearing naught,</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en now the land was nearing,<span class="hst">  </span>and followers with him brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then asked he of his kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>and of the queen, his lady:</p>
			<p class="t0">“What say you to the tidings?<span class="hst">  </span>I hear that guests to our home have come already.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “What can I answer,<span class="hst">  </span>but that ’tis well and right,</p>
			<p class="t0">When one such deeds is doing<span class="hst">  </span>as befit a worthy knight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ good or ill it bring us,<span class="hst">  </span>praise should they be earning.</p>
			<p class="t0">Can aught amiss befall him?<span class="hst">  </span>Herwic is wise, and aye for honor yearning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His queenly wife said further:<span class="hst">  </span>“Yet must we beware,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he may bring no burden<span class="hst">  </span>unto our kinsmen here.</p>
			<p class="t0">This have many told me,—<span class="hst">  </span>’tis for the sake of your daughter</p>
			<p class="t0">That he with many warriors<span class="hst">  </span>has come into your borders, o’er the water.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel with his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>had waited a little too long:</p>
			<p class="t0">The wrath of young King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>now had waxen strong.</p>
			<p class="t0">In the cool of the early morning,<span class="hst">  </span>he, with followers daring,</p>
			<p class="t0">Reached King Hettel’s castle,<span class="hst">  </span>and later with his men the strife was sharing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While yet the men were sleeping<span class="hst">  </span>within King Hettel’s halls,</p>
			<p class="t0">The watchman from the castle<span class="hst">  </span>down to them loudly calls:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Up from your rest now, quickly!<span class="hst">  </span>Arm yourselves and listen!</p>
			<p class="t0">Foes from abroad are coming!<span class="hst">  </span>E’en now, on their way, I see the helmets glisten.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">From off their beds upsprang they,<span class="hst">  </span>no longer dared they lie;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoe’er there was among them,<span class="hst">  </span>in rank or low or high,</p>
			<p class="t0">Must bear a heavy burden,<span class="hst">  </span>for life and honor caring.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus the young King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>strove for a wife, the storm of warfare daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel and Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>had now to the window come:</p>
			<p class="t0">Men they saw with Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>brought from a far-off home</p>
			<p class="t0">Among the hills of Galeis,<span class="hst">  </span>where they had their dwelling;</p>
			<p class="t0">These the mighty Morunc<span class="hst">  </span>in Waleis knew, and oft of them was telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The foes were seen by Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>thronging towards the gate.</p>
			<p class="t0">Well Gu-drun’s brave father<span class="hst">  </span>must fear to meet their hate,</p>
			<p class="t0">As they were rushing onward,<span class="hst">  </span>tho’ high his heart was swelling:</p>
			<p class="t0">Much they roused his anger,<span class="hst">  </span>but them his burghers helped erelong in quelling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Armed to guard the castle<span class="hst">  </span>were a hundred men or more;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel himself fought boldly,<span class="hst">  </span>goodwill for this he bore.</p>
			<p class="t0">His lieges all were doughty,<span class="hst">  </span>but yet they could not save him;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hard were the blows for Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>that in the fight the brave young Herwic gave him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon his foeman’s helmet<span class="hst">  </span>whizzing blasts, fire-hot,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were struck by the daring Herwic.<span class="hst">  </span>The many blows he smote</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun now saw with wonder,<span class="hst">  </span>her eyes upon him feeding:</p>
			<p class="t0">He seemed a knight most worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>and love she felt, e’en though her heart was bleeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel bore his weapon<span class="hst">  </span>grimly ’gainst his foe;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of strength no less than riches<span class="hst">  </span>he had, in truth, enow:</p>
			<p class="t0">But soon he did unwisely,<span class="hst">  </span>he pressed on him too nearly,</p>
			<p class="t0">And those within the castle<span class="hst">  </span>saw the fight between them all too clearly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The sore-beleaguered dwellers<span class="hst">  </span>the gates would gladly shut;</p>
			<p class="t0">But now their losses told them<span class="hst">  </span>that this would nothing boot:</p>
			<p class="t0">Friends as well as foemen<span class="hst">  </span>near the gates were thronging,</p>
			<p class="t0">And great was the hope of Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>to win the maid for whom his heart was longing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel then and Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>against each other dashed,</p>
			<p class="t0">In sight of all their followers;<span class="hst">  </span>flames shot out and flashed</p>
			<p class="t0">On the bosses of the bucklers<span class="hst">  </span>which they both were wearing:</p>
			<p class="t0">But little while it lasted,<span class="hst">  </span>ere knowledge of each other they were sharing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Hettel saw in Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>a warrior so proud,</p>
			<p class="t0">And one so truly daring,<span class="hst">  </span>he cried to all aloud:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Should any here forbid me<span class="hst">  </span>that I with him be friendly,</p>
			<p class="t0">He knows the knight but little;<span class="hst">  </span>deadly wounds he hews, in mood unkindly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>looked on, and heard the din.</p>
			<p class="t0">Luck is round and rolling,<span class="hst">  </span>like a ball, I ween;</p>
			<p class="t0">And since to end the fighting<span class="hst">  </span>to her it was not given,</p>
			<p class="t0">She hoped that, when ’twas over,<span class="hst">  </span>her father and his foe would find their strength was even.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She then began to call to him,<span class="hst">  </span>from out the palace hall:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Hettel, my noble father,<span class="hst">  </span>behold how blood doth fall,</p>
			<p class="t0">From out the hauberks flowing!<span class="hst">  </span>Everywhere about us</p>
			<p class="t0">The walls therewith are spattered!<span class="hst">  </span>A neighbor ill is Herwic, and harm hath wrought us.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If you would grant my wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>you now will be at peace;</p>
			<p class="t0">Give rest to heart from anger,<span class="hst">  </span>and let your fighting cease,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till I can ask of Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>and he to us be telling,</p>
			<p class="t0">About his land and kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>and where his nearest kinsmen have their dwelling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the proud young Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“Not yet may peace begin,</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless without my weapons<span class="hst">  </span>I your love may win.</p>
			<p class="t0">If rest a while be granted,<span class="hst">  </span>the knowledge you are seeking</p>
			<p class="t0">I then will give you freely,<span class="hst">  </span>and of my kinsmen will to you be speaking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now, for love of the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>the strife did they forego.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then shook they off their armor,<span class="hst">  </span>each battle-weary foe,</p>
			<p class="t0">And bathed in running waters,<span class="hst">  </span>from rusty stains to free them.</p>
			<p class="t0">They soon were cheered and rested,<span class="hst">  </span>and none could grudge in happy mood to see them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A hundred knights with Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>went from the field to find</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the Hegeling maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>still wavering in her mind.</p>
			<p class="t0">She, with other ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>gave him welcome kindly;</p>
			<p class="t0">But the worthy, high-born Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>hardly dared to think their wishes friendly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The fair and comely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>showed the guests their seats;</p>
			<p class="t0">The bravery of Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>erelong with love she meets:</p>
			<p class="t0">His high and noble breeding<span class="hst">  </span>earned him kindest greeting.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas thought Gu-drun and Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>should grant his suit, without a longer waiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the ladies then spake Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“I oft have heard it said</p>
			<p class="t0">That you of me speak lightly,<span class="hst">  </span>and think me lowly bred:</p>
			<p class="t0">Your scorn may bring you sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>after all my striving;</p>
			<p class="t0">The rich may from the poorest<span class="hst">  </span>a blessing gain, the while with them they’re living.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “Where is the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>who could behold with scorn</p>
			<p class="t0">A knight who strove so bravely,<span class="hst">  </span>or from his love could turn?</p>
			<p class="t0">Believe me,” said the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>“I do not hold you lightly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Never maid more kindly<span class="hst">  </span>has looked on you, or prized your worth more rightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If now my friends and kindred<span class="hst">  </span>leave for this will give,</p>
			<p class="t0">Even as you wish it,<span class="hst">  </span>with you I will gladly live.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then with fondest glances<span class="hst">  </span>he her eye was seeking:</p>
			<p class="t0">In her heart she bore him,<span class="hst">  </span>and owned the truth to all, no falsehood speaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The brave and happy Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>begged that he might dare</p>
			<p class="t0">To woo the fair young maiden.<span class="hst">  </span>Now to grant his prayer</p>
			<p class="t0">Were Hettel and Hilda ready;<span class="hst">  </span>but first must they be knowing</p>
			<p class="t0">Whether Gu-drun, their daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>was glad or sorry for the kingly Herwic’s wooing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic was quick in learning<span class="hst">  </span>how kindly was her mood:</p>
			<p class="t0">And now the brave young warrior<span class="hst">  </span>before the maiden stood,</p>
			<p class="t0">In shape as fair and comely<span class="hst">  </span>as if the hand of a master</p>
			<p class="t0">On a white wall had drawn him:<span class="hst">  </span>while there he stood her love but grew the faster.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If you your love will give me,”<span class="hst">  </span>he said, “most lovely maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then shall my truest worship<span class="hst">  </span>to you be ever paid;</p>
			<p class="t0">Throughout my lands and castles<span class="hst">  </span>to you there shall be given</p>
			<p class="t0">My kinsmen’s faithful service,<span class="hst">  </span>and ne’er shall I repent that thus I’ve striven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “I give you freely<span class="hst">  </span>the love for which you pray;</p>
			<p class="t0">By all your toils and daring<span class="hst">  </span>you well have earned to-day</p>
			<p class="t0">That you and all my kindred<span class="hst">  </span>foes shall be no longer.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now none can make me sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>and every day our bliss shall grow the stronger.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then they sent for Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>thus ended was the fight.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon came he to his daughter;<span class="hst">  </span>and many a faithful knight</p>
			<p class="t0">Followed the king, their master,<span class="hst">  </span>who unto him had ridden</p>
			<p class="t0">From all the Hegeling kingdom.<span class="hst">  </span>Thus to the strife a long farewell was bidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now when Hettel’s kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>their wish for this did speak,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then asked he of his daughter<span class="hst">  </span>if she would gladly take</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic, the knight so noble,<span class="hst">  </span>who in his heart had set her.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the lovely maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“There’s not another I could love the better.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They then betrothed the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>at once to the knightly king,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who in his land would crown her.<span class="hst">  </span>This did gladness bring</p>
			<p class="t0">To him, and sorrow likewise:<span class="hst">  </span>ere many years were ended,</p>
			<p class="t0">And she to him was wedded,<span class="hst">  </span>good knights in stormy fight their lives defended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To take the maiden with him<span class="hst">  </span>Herwic now was fain;</p>
			<p class="t0">But this her mother grudged him:<span class="hst">  </span>thereby much woe and pain</p>
			<p class="t0">Came upon him later<span class="hst">  </span>from foes as yet unheeded.</p>
			<p class="t0">The king was told by Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>that longer time ere she be crowned was needed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They thought it best for Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>to leave the maiden there,</p>
			<p class="t0">While he with other women<span class="hst">  </span>might pass the time elsewhere,</p>
			<p class="t0">And wait to wed the lady<span class="hst">  </span>until a year were ended.</p>
			<p class="t0">This learned the men of Alzabie:<span class="hst">  </span>to wait so long for her young Herwic ill befriended.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c13">Tale the Thirteenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW SIEGFRIED MADE WAR AGAINST HERWIC.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Siegfried, king of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>called for all his men;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ships were soon made ready,<span class="hst">  </span>wherever they were seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then with food and weapons<span class="hst">  </span>to load them it was bidden,</p>
			<p class="t0">For war against King Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>from all but faithful friends his thoughts were hidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A score of wide, strong barges<span class="hst">  </span>bade he to be made.</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween they liked it little<span class="hst">  </span>to whom the king now said</p>
			<p class="t0">That forthwith unto Sealand<span class="hst">  </span>to fight must they be faring;</p>
			<p class="t0">And he would thither hasten<span class="hst">  </span>as soon as, winter o’er, springtide was nearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Eighty thousand warriors<span class="hst">  </span>soon to him had come;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of fighting men in Alzabie<span class="hst">  </span>none were left at home.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then swore the Moorland princes<span class="hst">  </span>for war to make them ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">Some of these still lingered,<span class="hst">  </span>others to follow with the king were speedy.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then against the Sealands<span class="hst">  </span>the threat of war he made.</p>
			<p class="t0">This roused the wrath of Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>who well might him upbraid;</p>
			<p class="t0">To earn the hate of Siegfried<span class="hst">  </span>wrong had he done him never.</p>
			<p class="t0">His marches and his castles<span class="hst">  </span>he bade his men to guard, now more than ever.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then he said in sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>to friends who came in haste</p>
			<p class="t0">That foes would burn his castles,<span class="hst">  </span>and his lands lay waste:</p>
			<p class="t0">All he could give his liegemen,<span class="hst">  </span>that he held but lightly.</p>
			<p class="t0">They took their wages gladly;<span class="hst">  </span>that war would bring them riches, hoped they rightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">About the gladsome May-time,<span class="hst">  </span>there went across the sea</p>
			<p class="t0">Warriors out of Alzabie,<span class="hst">  </span>and eke from Abakie.</p>
			<p class="t0">Onward came they proudly,<span class="hst">  </span>as tho’ the world’s end seeking;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many now trod boldly<span class="hst">  </span>who in the dust their rest would soon be taking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Into the land of Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>they cast the burning brand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then all whom he could gather,<span class="hst">  </span>and all his friends at hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Rode to the field with Herwic.<span class="hst">  </span>Thro’ war-storms grimly driven,</p>
			<p class="t0">They with their lives must bargain<span class="hst">  </span>for gold and gems and silver to them given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him, the king of Sealand,<span class="hst">  </span>great ill erelong was wrought.</p>
			<p class="t0">A stalwart foeman was he:<span class="hst">  </span>Aha, how well he fought!</p>
			<p class="t0">He made the land the richer<span class="hst">  </span>with the dead there lying:</p>
			<p class="t0">The old in fight grew youthful:<span class="hst">  </span>the strong were slain, who recked not yet of dying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Long the fighting lasted,<span class="hst">  </span>till thickly lay the dead:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to the brave King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>came at last the need</p>
			<p class="t0">To flee into his marches,<span class="hst">  </span>for life he there was turning;</p>
			<p class="t0">All his lands lay smoking:<span class="hst">  </span>of this to Gu-drun, his lady, sent he warning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now to the land of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>men at his bidding went:</p>
			<p class="t0">Many tears and bitter<span class="hst">  </span>they shed when they were sent</p>
			<p class="t0">To find the great King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>and the tale to him to carry.</p>
			<p class="t0">They were not long in showing<span class="hst">  </span>unto the king their plight so hard and dreary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Tho’ sad in mood he found them,<span class="hst">  </span>a welcome kind he gave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Such as far-off wanderers<span class="hst">  </span>and homeless friends should have.</p>
			<p class="t0">He asked if from their homesteads<span class="hst">  </span>they were hither driven,</p>
			<p class="t0">When foes their lands had wasted,<span class="hst">  </span>and all their marches had to flames been given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to him they answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“In sorrow did we leave:</p>
			<p class="t0">The faithful men of Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>from early morn till eve,</p>
			<p class="t0">Sell their lives full dearly,<span class="hst">  </span>and well his gifts are earning;</p>
			<p class="t0">They fight for name and honor:<span class="hst">  </span>for this at home are many women mourning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to them said Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“To my daughter make it known;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever she shall wish for<span class="hst">  </span>at once shall that be done.</p>
			<p class="t0">If she for vengeance calleth<span class="hst">  </span>for the wrongs he wrought you,</p>
			<p class="t0">We then will help you gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and pay him back the ill that he has brought you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before they yet had spoken<span class="hst">  </span>unto the fair young maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">Already of her sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>her friends had taken heed.</p>
			<p class="t0">The lady had been longing<span class="hst">  </span>to see the heralds hourly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Them in haste she sent for,<span class="hst">  </span>the loss of land and honor, mourning sorely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they came before her,<span class="hst">  </span>they found the queenly maid</p>
			<p class="t0">Sitting sad, and weeping,—<span class="hst">  </span>faithful love she had;</p>
			<p class="t0">She asked them of her lover,<span class="hst">  </span>and how they leave had taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">And if he still was living<span class="hst">  </span>when they of late had land and home forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered one among them:<span class="hst">  </span>“We left him sound and well;</p>
			<p class="t0">But since the day we saw him<span class="hst">  </span>we know not what befell,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or how the men of Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>may his home have wasted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Mischief they had done him,<span class="hst">  </span>neither from fire and plunder had they rested.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Listen, high-born maiden!<span class="hst">  </span>my master’s bidding heed:</p>
			<p class="t0">He and all his warriors<span class="hst">  </span>are now in sorest need.</p>
			<p class="t0">To lose both life and honor<span class="hst">  </span>they are fearing daily;</p>
			<p class="t0">And now my lord, King Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>sends to beg your men to his help to rally.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>then from her seat upstood;</p>
			<p class="t0">The wrongs that had been done her<span class="hst">  </span>she to her father showed:</p>
			<p class="t0">She said her men were slaughtered,<span class="hst">  </span>and her castles wasted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And told her father, Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>that to ride to Herwic’s help she would he had hasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then in her arms she pressed him,<span class="hst">  </span>her eyes with weeping wet:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Help, O dearest father!<span class="hst">  </span>My woes are all too great,</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless your many liegemen,<span class="hst">  </span>with ready hand, are willing</p>
			<p class="t0">To help my good friend Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>none else can end the strife, my sorrow healing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“That will I leave to no one,”<span class="hst">  </span>the king did freely say;</p>
			<p class="t0">“I will haste to help King Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>and wait not many a day.</p>
			<p class="t0">As well as I am able,<span class="hst">  </span>I will end your sorrow:</p>
			<p class="t0">I will call for the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>and many other friends, before the morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“He will bring from Sturmland<span class="hst">  </span>all the men of his lands;</p>
			<p class="t0">And when ’tis known by Morunc<span class="hst">  </span>how ill with us it stands,</p>
			<p class="t0">Fighters full a thousand<span class="hst">  </span>to bring will he be speedy.</p>
			<p class="t0">Our foes shall find out quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>that under helmets we to march are ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Horant, too, from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>shall bring upon the way</p>
			<p class="t0">Of men full thrice a thousand:<span class="hst">  </span>nor will Irold stay;</p>
			<p class="t0">But he will raise his banner,<span class="hst">  </span>and hasten to the slaughter.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, too, thy brother Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>will come, and all will earn the blessing of my daughter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The heralds soon went riding<span class="hst">  </span>whom the maid did send.</p>
			<p class="t0">Her friends far off were living,<span class="hst">  </span>but all who help would lend</p>
			<p class="t0">To heal the maiden’s sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>would honor great be earning;</p>
			<p class="t0">Knights would she warmly welcome:<span class="hst">  </span>for this erelong the more to her were turning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hilda, the maiden’s mother,<span class="hst">  </span>unto her daughter spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whoe’er is quick to help you,<span class="hst">  </span>and now his shield shall take</p>
			<p class="t0">To follow with your warriors<span class="hst">  </span>when they to war are faring,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er we gain by fighting<span class="hst">  </span>he shall, in truth, henceforth with us be sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the chests were opened;<span class="hst">  </span>men to court soon bore</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er therein was lying,<span class="hst">  </span>of fighting-gear a store,</p>
			<p class="t0">Fast with steel well studded;<span class="hst">  </span>then the knights were laden</p>
			<p class="t0">With armor white as silver:<span class="hst">  </span>this made glad the heart of the queenly maiden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To full a thousand warriors<span class="hst">  </span>were given clothes and steeds;</p>
			<p class="t0">Out of stalls men brought them,<span class="hst">  </span>as oft the horse one leads,</p>
			<p class="t0">When, along the highways,<span class="hst">  </span>men to the fight go riding.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all the king’s good horses<span class="hst">  </span>they left but very few at rest abiding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When from his queenly lady<span class="hst">  </span>the king his leave did take,</p>
			<p class="t0">Both Hilda and her daughter<span class="hst">  </span>began to weep for his sake;</p>
			<p class="t0">But on the knights forth riding<span class="hst">  </span>gladly they were gazing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “May God in heaven<span class="hst">  </span>so help the fight that men may you be praising.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After they all were gathered<span class="hst">  </span>without the castle gate,</p>
			<p class="t0">Youths were there heard singing,<span class="hst">  </span>hoping for plunder great.</p>
			<p class="t0">Each thought, by hardest fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>to win himself much riches;</p>
			<p class="t0">But far must they yet be riding,<span class="hst">  </span>for long the way to their master’s foemen stretches.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On the third morning early<span class="hst">  </span>came, at break of day,</p>
			<p class="t0">The very aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>with a thousand to the fray;</p>
			<p class="t0">And from the Danish kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>as the seventh day was dawning,</p>
			<p class="t0">Came Horant with four thousand,<span class="hst">  </span>to whom the fair Gu-drun had sent her warning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">From out the Waalisch marches<span class="hst">  </span>Morunc thither rode;</p>
			<p class="t0">He ever fought for the ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>for the love to them he owed.</p>
			<p class="t0">Twenty thousand warriors<span class="hst">  </span>he brought,—for nought he tarried:</p>
			<p class="t0">These were all well-weaponed,<span class="hst">  </span>and happily rode, while help to the king they carried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The queenly maiden’s brother,<span class="hst">  </span>Ortwin, the youthful knight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Brought across the water,<span class="hst">  </span>to help her in the fight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Forty hundred warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>or even a number greater:</p>
			<p class="t0">Were it known to the men of Alzabie,<span class="hst">  </span>well might they have feared to meet him later.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before they yet could help him,<span class="hst">  </span>to Herwic and his men</p>
			<p class="t0">The strife had now gone badly,<span class="hst">  </span>his luck began to wane:</p>
			<p class="t0">To him and all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>was evil sore betiding;</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ they struggled bravely,<span class="hst">  </span>his foes too near his castle gate were riding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Great mishaps to Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>from Siegfried’s kin arose;</p>
			<p class="t0">For now the gates of the castle<span class="hst">  </span>were shattered by their blows.</p>
			<p class="t0">False friends had made it easy,<span class="hst">  </span>and boasts too loudly spoken:</p>
			<p class="t0">If e’er to such one trusteth,<span class="hst">  </span>it worketh him no good, and his hopes are broken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now ’twas told to Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>men fast for help had gone.</p>
			<p class="t0">The foes from fight ne’er rested,<span class="hst">  </span>by anger driven on;</p>
			<p class="t0">From early morn to even,<span class="hst">  </span>they oft to the strife were bidden:</p>
			<p class="t0">But now the friends of Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>on every side drew near, nor long lay hidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When this the men of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>did learn, they well might fear</p>
			<p class="t0">That now two kings against them<span class="hst">  </span>in the fight should share:</p>
			<p class="t0">For them it was unlucky<span class="hst">  </span>that Hettel now was leading</p>
			<p class="t0">His many fighters thither;<span class="hst">  </span>he from afar had come, to Herwic speeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Friends were they to each other;<span class="hst">  </span>so both would meet the foe.</p>
			<p class="t0">These, the men from Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>bold themselves did show:</p>
			<p class="t0">One saw by all their bearing<span class="hst">  </span>they would from none be flying;</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who with them struggled<span class="hst">  </span>by hardest toil must their reward be buying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, the very daring,<span class="hst">  </span>with all his knights had come;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the lovely lady,<span class="hst">  </span>had called him from his home</p>
			<p class="t0">To help her lover, Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>and a host had ridden hither:</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er might now befall them,<span class="hst">  </span>later full happy rode they thence together.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Although their foes were heathen,<span class="hst">  </span>from out the Moorish land,</p>
			<p class="t0">They might not back be driven:<span class="hst">  </span>one well might understand</p>
			<p class="t0">That in any earthly kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>they were the best and boldest.</p>
			<p class="t0">To all who came to meet them<span class="hst">  </span>they gave a sorry welcome and a shelter coldest.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic, king of Sealand,<span class="hst">  </span>his loss would now make good</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon his foes from Alzabie.<span class="hst">  </span>For this must flow the blood</p>
			<p class="t0">On either side of many;<span class="hst">  </span>to friends and kin were given</p>
			<p class="t0">Wounds full fast and heavy:<span class="hst">  </span>to bear his own was hard for Hettel even.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they had come together<span class="hst">  </span>of whom I spoke before,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bringing all their followers,<span class="hst">  </span>gladness they knew no more;</p>
			<p class="t0">On them were ever resting<span class="hst">  </span>heavy care and sorrow</p>
			<p class="t0">For what the night might bring them.<span class="hst">  </span>They thought: “How shall we live to see the morrow?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thrice with the Moorish foemen<span class="hst">  </span>they strove on the stormy field,</p>
			<p class="t0">While peace was given the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>as knights are wont to yield.</p>
			<p class="t0">Again with sword and spear-shaft<span class="hst">  </span>they the strife would settle:</p>
			<p class="t0">Peace not yet they wished for,<span class="hst">  </span>but wounds the more they got in hard-fought battle.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Nor Herwic’s men nor Siegfried’s<span class="hst">  </span>yet would leave the fight;</p>
			<p class="t0">They to the last had struggled,<span class="hst">  </span>and many a bravest knight</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the field lay wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>or in death was sleeping.</p>
			<p class="t0">This was told to the women,<span class="hst">  </span>who now began a wild, unmeasured weeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">How well the daring Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>in battle-storm did fight!</p>
			<p class="t0">Strong was he and skilful,<span class="hst">  </span>and oft the aged knight</p>
			<p class="t0">Gave to the foe heart-sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>by all the ill he wrought him:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever to fight with his warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>by the side of the boldest and best, his wishes taught him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Horant, too, from Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>brave was he enough!</p>
			<p class="t0">Beneath his hand were shattered<span class="hst">  </span>helmets strong and tough;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er by him ’twas forgotten<span class="hst">  </span>to wear his armor shining;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ill he wrought to many,<span class="hst">  </span>and oft the ranks of his foemen he was thinning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The quick and fearless Morunc<span class="hst">  </span>boldly stretched his hand</p>
			<p class="t0">Ofttimes beyond his buckler,<span class="hst">  </span>and oft the fight he gained.</p>
			<p class="t0">To shun the king of Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>ne’er would he be seeking;</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon that king, so mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>he the wrath of Herwic now was wreaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The great and doughty Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>when that his daughter fair</p>
			<p class="t0">Had sent to beg her father<span class="hst">  </span>in Herwic’s fight to share,</p>
			<p class="t0">That peace at last might follow,<span class="hst">  </span>fought for him not idly:</p>
			<p class="t0">If life were dear to any,<span class="hst">  </span>’twere best to shun King Hettel’s borders widely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Bravely strove King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>on the field and at the gate;</p>
			<p class="t0">None than he fought better.<span class="hst">  </span>His head was often wet,</p>
			<p class="t0">Beneath his armor dripping,<span class="hst">  </span>with sweat that fast was oozing.</p>
			<p class="t0">In death were many deafened;<span class="hst">  </span>they who would crush him must their lives be losing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wigaleis, the faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>great ill to many wrought.</p>
			<p class="t0">Sir Fru-te, too, from Daneland,<span class="hst">  </span>with knightly prowess fought:</p>
			<p class="t0">The thanks of all his fellows<span class="hst">  </span>he should of right be sharing;</p>
			<p class="t0">He strove where the fight was stormy,<span class="hst">  </span>and none e’er knew an aged knight so daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The lord who came from Ortland,<span class="hst">  </span>Ortwin, brave and young,</p>
			<p class="t0">Showed the hand of a warrior;<span class="hst">  </span>it was on many a tongue,</p>
			<p class="t0">That never man in warfare<span class="hst">  </span>bore himself more boldly:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wounds he gave the deepest,<span class="hst">  </span>and this by none was ever told of coldly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For twelve long days of fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>earnestly they strove.</p>
			<p class="t0">The men led on by Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>oft their spear-shafts drove</p>
			<p class="t0">Thro’ their foes’ light bucklers,<span class="hst">  </span>as close they met together:</p>
			<p class="t0">The fighters proud from Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>sorely rued the day that brought them thither.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon the thirteenth morning,<span class="hst">  </span>ere early mass was said,</p>
			<p class="t0">With sorry heart spake Siegfried:<span class="hst">  </span>“How many here lie dead</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all our bravest warriors!<span class="hst">  </span>In his lofty wooing</p>
			<p class="t0">The king of Sealand also<span class="hst">  </span>here to himself has evil great been doing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the men of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>made he known his will,</p>
			<p class="t0">To a stronghold to betake them,<span class="hst">  </span>there their wounds to heal:</p>
			<p class="t0">They, with those from Alzabie,<span class="hst">  </span>were earnest to go thither;</p>
			<p class="t0">Right glad were these far-riders<span class="hst">  </span>that all in death might not be found together.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to a sheltering castle<span class="hst">  </span>to turn they all began,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where onward, fast beside it,<span class="hst">  </span>a wide, deep river ran.</p>
			<p class="t0">While they were thither riding,<span class="hst">  </span>fleeing away from danger,</p>
			<p class="t0">They were still seen fighting<span class="hst">  </span>with those who ne’er would yield their homes to a stranger.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now against King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>the king of Moorland rode:</p>
			<p class="t0">Well might one believe it,<span class="hst">  </span>his former warlike mood</p>
			<p class="t0">Was but a slight beginning;<span class="hst">  </span>he soon a foe was meeting</p>
			<p class="t0">Who many of his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>with deep and deadly wounds of late was greeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel, he of the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>and Siegfried, the Moorland king,</p>
			<p class="t0">There unto the struggle<span class="hst">  </span>all their strength did bring;</p>
			<p class="t0">Shields were hacked to pieces<span class="hst">  </span>by the swords they wielded:</p>
			<p class="t0">The mighty lord of Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>to the castle fled, nor to him of Daneland yielded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Camps by the men from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>for themselves were made:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the beleaguered warriors,—<span class="hst">  </span>it cannot be gainsaid,—</p>
			<p class="t0">E’er many days were over,<span class="hst">  </span>with care were burdened sadly;</p>
			<p class="t0">However good their shelter,<span class="hst">  </span>all would then have been at home more gladly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thus the boastful fighters<span class="hst">  </span>were by the foeman’s hand</p>
			<p class="t0">Fast held within the stronghold;<span class="hst">  </span>nor was their knightly band</p>
			<p class="t0">Now able to give battle,<span class="hst">  </span>although for this yet longing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their castle well they guarded,<span class="hst">  </span>as best they might, wherein they now were thronging.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c14">Tale the Fourteenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HETTEL SENT TIDINGS FROM HERWIC’S LAND.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel then sent tidings,<span class="hst">  </span>to still their fears at home.</p>
			<p class="t0">To the fair and high-born ladies<span class="hst">  </span>men with news did come,</p>
			<p class="t0">That unto the old and youthful,<span class="hst">  </span>throughout the stormy fighting,</p>
			<p class="t0">Good luck had aye befallen;<span class="hst">  </span>and now, with hope must they for them be waiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He bade his men to tell them<span class="hst">  </span>how Siegfried was besieged,</p>
			<p class="t0">While he with all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>war against him waged,</p>
			<p class="t0">To help the lord of Sealand,<span class="hst">  </span>loved by Gu-drun, his daughter;</p>
			<p class="t0">That all, as they were able,<span class="hst">  </span>daily fought for her, and for him who sought her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel’s queen, fair Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>the hope began to have</p>
			<p class="t0">That luck would follow Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>and all his warriors brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">And, as their worth befitted,<span class="hst">  </span>all might well be speeding.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said Gu-drun: “God grant it,<span class="hst">  </span>that they our friends may back in health be leading.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By Wâ-te’s men from Sturmland,<span class="hst">  </span>the foes from Alzabie</p>
			<p class="t0">And all who came from Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>were kept away from the sea;</p>
			<p class="t0">Sadly must they tarry<span class="hst">  </span>within the sheltering castle:</p>
			<p class="t0">In Wâ-te and in Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>foes they had with whom they ill could wrestle.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Loudly swore King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>the castle ne’er to leave;</p>
			<p class="t0">That he and all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>still to the end would strive,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till those to him had yielded<span class="hst">  </span>who now the Moor befriended.</p>
			<p class="t0">Unwise had been their inroad,<span class="hst">  </span>and this for them one day in sorrow ended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Meanwhile the spies of Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>whom he had thither sent,</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ little good they looked for,<span class="hst">  </span>from the Norman border went;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever to learn what happened<span class="hst">  </span>they a watch were keeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">And from the stormy warfare<span class="hst">  </span>they hoped that Hettel might no gain be reaping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now they saw that Siegfried,<span class="hst">  </span>the Moorland king high-born,</p>
			<p class="t0">Was kept within the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>besieged both eve and morn;</p>
			<p class="t0">Thence could he sally never,<span class="hst">  </span>and this he knew with sorrow;</p>
			<p class="t0">His lands so far were lying,<span class="hst">  </span>he little help from them could hope to borrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The Norman errand-bearers,<span class="hst">  </span>sent forth their watch to make</p>
			<p class="t0">By Ludwig and young Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>to them now hastened back:</p>
			<p class="t0">The happy news they carried,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon at home were giving,</p>
			<p class="t0">That Hettel, the king, and Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>were busy now, in warfare ever striving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To them the lord of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>thanks for the tidings gave,</p>
			<p class="t0">And asked them: “Can you tell us<span class="hst">  </span>how long those foemen brave,</p>
			<p class="t0">The men from the land of Karadie,<span class="hst">  </span>will in Sealand tarry,</p>
			<p class="t0">Fighting ’gainst its warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>till they, their wrongs avenged, of war are weary?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One of them made answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“The truth you now may hear:</p>
			<p class="t0">There they yet must linger<span class="hst">  </span>more than another year.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never from their stronghold<span class="hst">  </span>will the Hegelings free them;</p>
			<p class="t0">They there so well are guarded,<span class="hst">  </span>that on their homeward way none e’er shall see them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the knight of Normandy,<span class="hst">  </span>the daring Hartmut, spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“This frees my heart from sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>and hope in me doth wake!</p>
			<p class="t0">If they are now beleaguered,<span class="hst">  </span>then are we well befriended;</p>
			<p class="t0">We must to Hegeling hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>ere Hettel’s fight with Siegfried shall be ended.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig and young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>had both the selfsame mind,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Had they ten thousand fighters<span class="hst">  </span>whom they at once could find,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun they might lay hold on,<span class="hst">  </span>and to their home might carry,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before her father, Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>came back again from the land where he did tarry.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut’s mother, Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>earnestly gave thought</p>
			<p class="t0">To wreak her wrath on Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>that he to harm be brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">Because her dear son Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>he shamefully had slighted.</p>
			<p class="t0">She wished the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>and Fru-te might be hanged, for the help they plighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the old she-devil:<span class="hst">  </span>“Good knights, your hire behold!</p>
			<p class="t0">If you will now ride thither,<span class="hst">  </span>my silver and my gold,</p>
			<p class="t0">That will I give you freely,—<span class="hst">  </span>but women shall not share it.</p>
			<p class="t0">I care not if Hettel and Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>shall rue their wrong, and ne’er again will dare it.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quoth Ludwig, Hartmut’s father:<span class="hst">  </span>“We from our Norman land</p>
			<p class="t0">Forthwith must make an inroad:<span class="hst">  </span>soon will I have at hand</p>
			<p class="t0">Twenty thousand fighters<span class="hst">  </span>whom I for war will gather;</p>
			<p class="t0">With these it will be easy<span class="hst">  </span>to seize Gu-drun, and bear her from her father.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the youthful Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Might ever this betide,</p>
			<p class="t0">That Hilda’s lovely daughter<span class="hst">  </span>I here should see my bride,</p>
			<p class="t0">I would not take in barter<span class="hst">  </span>for that a princedom fairest;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then might we here together<span class="hst">  </span>pass our lives, each one to the other dearest.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Busily his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>hour by hour, gave thought</p>
			<p class="t0">How they could do his wishes.<span class="hst">  </span>A host King Ludwig brought</p>
			<p class="t0">To lead against the Hegelings;<span class="hst">  </span>well were they outfitted.</p>
			<p class="t0">How should Hilda know it,<span class="hst">  </span>that soon thereby her welfare would be blighted?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The wife of Ludwig also<span class="hst">  </span>helped them as she could.</p>
			<p class="t0">For this she plotted ever,<span class="hst">  </span>that fair Gu-drun be wooed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, as the bride of Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>to Normandy be carried;</p>
			<p class="t0">She did her best most busily<span class="hst">  </span>that the maid one day should to her son be married.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig said to Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>his well belovéd son:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Think well, O knight most worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>no toil we now must shun,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until our foes are mastered<span class="hst">  </span>and from their lands are driven.</p>
			<p class="t0">Reward the guests who help us;<span class="hst">  </span>to our men at home by me shall gifts be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">These they soon were sharing,<span class="hst">  </span>all and every one.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never yet in Suabia<span class="hst">  </span>gifts so rich were known,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of steeds for war or burden,<span class="hst">  </span>saddles, and shields fair shining;</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween they were gladly given:<span class="hst">  </span>Ludwig ne’er before such thanks was winning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quickly all made ready<span class="hst">  </span>to start upon their way.</p>
			<p class="t0">Sailors were found by Ludwig;<span class="hst">  </span>skilful men were they,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who the deep sea-pathways<span class="hst">  </span>knew, and well could follow;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hard must they be toiling<span class="hst">  </span>to win their wages high upon the billow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now, in seemly measure,<span class="hst">  </span>fit were they to go.</p>
			<p class="t0">Throughout the lands and highways<span class="hst">  </span>soon the news did grow</p>
			<p class="t0">That Ludwig and young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>home and land were leaving.</p>
			<p class="t0">They yet would see much sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>when they erelong their Hegeling foe were braving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When to the shore they had ridden,<span class="hst">  </span>ships were floating there,</p>
			<p class="t0">That workmen well had builded,<span class="hst">  </span>the knights away to bear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gerlind’s gold and riches<span class="hst">  </span>had made them strong and steady.</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor Wâ-te the old nor Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>of this knew aught, nor were for their coming ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With three and twenty thousand<span class="hst">  </span>they sailed the waters o’er.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now for Gu-drun young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>a weight of sorrow bore:</p>
			<p class="t0">This, before his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>to hide he was not earnest;</p>
			<p class="t0">He hoped to meet King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>and him to overcome in strife the sternest.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As yet they knew not fully<span class="hst">  </span>how they his land could reach.</p>
			<p class="t0">To the sons of many a mother<span class="hst">  </span>the raid did sorrow teach.</p>
			<p class="t0">Near to the shores of Ortland<span class="hst">  </span>the rolling billows bore them,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before ’twas known to Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>now Hilda’s castle rose in sight before them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The warriors led by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>were still twelve miles away;</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet had they come already<span class="hst">  </span>over the wide, deep sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the land of the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>and to its shores so nearly</p>
			<p class="t0">That castles, towers, and palaces<span class="hst">  </span>in Hilda’s town they all could see most clearly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig, king of Normandy,<span class="hst">  </span>bade that on the sand</p>
			<p class="t0">They now should drop the anchors;<span class="hst">  </span>he then gave word to land</p>
			<p class="t0">To all his men together,<span class="hst">  </span>and bade them do it quickly:</p>
			<p class="t0">They now had come so near them,<span class="hst">  </span>they feared the Hegeling bands would gather thickly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then bore they up the weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>with shields and helmets good,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they had with them carried<span class="hst">  </span>over the heaving flood:</p>
			<p class="t0">They to fight made ready;<span class="hst">  </span>yet they at first bethought them</p>
			<p class="t0">To send through the land their runners,<span class="hst">  </span>to learn if friendly helpers might be brought them.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c15">Tale the Fifteenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HARTMUT CARRIED AWAY GUDRUN.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now at Hartmut’s bidding<span class="hst">  </span>heralds quickly rode</p>
			<p class="t0">To where the queenly Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>and her daughter dear abode.</p>
			<p class="t0">To them his word they carried,<span class="hst">  </span>that if to wed the maiden</p>
			<p class="t0">They should think him worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>her and her mother both it well might gladden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">If she her love would give him,<span class="hst">  </span>as he had asked before,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Ofttimes his heart was heavy<span class="hst">  </span>for the love to her he bore,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That he would ever serve her<span class="hst">  </span>so long as he was living,</p>
			<p class="t0">And many lands wide-reaching,<span class="hst">  </span>held of his father, would to her be giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But if she would not love him,<span class="hst">  </span>she then would earn his hate;</p>
			<p class="t0">He asked of her that kindly<span class="hst">  </span>she his love would meet,</p>
			<p class="t0">So that he to his fatherland<span class="hst">  </span>his lovely bride might carry</p>
			<p class="t0">Without a fight or struggle.<span class="hst">  </span>To hope for this brave Hartmut ne’er was weary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Did she gainsay his wooing,<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut sent this word:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I will not be bought with silver,<span class="hst">  </span>albeit a heavy hoard,</p>
			<p class="t0">To leave in peace her kingdom;<span class="hst">  </span>she yet shall give me heeding.</p>
			<p class="t0">I will show Gu-drun, fair maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>brave knights enough, to be for her eyes fine feeding!</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Further, good errand-bearers,<span class="hst">  </span>this say to her from me:</p>
			<p class="t0">I ne’er will leave her borders<span class="hst">  </span>to sail on the wide, deep sea;</p>
			<p class="t0">Better will I think it<span class="hst">  </span>to be hewn in pieces even,</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless the Hegeling maiden<span class="hst">  </span>will follow me hence, to me in wedlock given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“But, should she scorn me wholly,<span class="hst">  </span>and never my bride will be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then me, with my daring fighters,<span class="hst">  </span>riding here she will see.</p>
			<p class="t0">Before the Hegeling castle<span class="hst">  </span>I will then leave lying</p>
			<p class="t0">Twenty thousand warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>on both sides of the roadway, dead or dying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Since by the craft of Wigaleis<span class="hst">  </span>King Hettel has been led,</p>
			<p class="t0">And by the aged Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>hither our way we’ve made</p>
			<p class="t0">Into the Hegeling kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>time and toil thus spending;</p>
			<p class="t0">For this shall many be fatherless,<span class="hst">  </span>and glad shall I be of the whole to make an ending.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those sent forth by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>fast on their way did ride,</p>
			<p class="t0">For he bade them wait no longer.<span class="hst">  </span>They came to a castle wide,</p>
			<p class="t0">By name ycleped Matelan;<span class="hst">  </span>therein was Hilda dwelling,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with her was her daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>the maid about whose charms all men were telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With them sent Hartmut also<span class="hst">  </span>two earls of wealth and name,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who with him out of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>over the waters came.</p>
			<p class="t0">He bade them see Queen Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>and kindly to bespeak her;</p>
			<p class="t0">To pledge to her his friendship,<span class="hst">  </span>and say that his goodwill would ne’er forsake her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of her they must ask her daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>for him who in his mind</p>
			<p class="t0">So high had ever set her,<span class="hst">  </span>above all womankind:</p>
			<p class="t0">In worthy love he wooed her,<span class="hst">  </span>and she would rank be taking</p>
			<p class="t0">That for aye would make her happy;<span class="hst">  </span>to do her will she ne’er would find him lacking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the maiden’s waiting-women<span class="hst">  </span>the news was quickly told,</p>
			<p class="t0">That from out the land of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>a band of wooers bold</p>
			<p class="t0">Hither rode to Matelan,<span class="hst">  </span>and for Gu-drun were suing:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hilda hushed the tidings,<span class="hst">  </span>for now Gu-drun in fright the tale was ruing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda’s faithful warders<span class="hst">  </span>opened soon the gate;</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who had ridden thither<span class="hst">  </span>need no longer wait;</p>
			<p class="t0">They to come in were bidden.<span class="hst">  </span>The gate was thrown wide open,</p>
			<p class="t0">And the men sent there by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>into Matelan rode: no ill to them did happen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They quickly told their wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>to see King Hettel’s wife.</p>
			<p class="t0">It was not yet allowed them;<span class="hst">  </span>they who should guard her life,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to the king must answer,<span class="hst">  </span>at first had this forbidden:</p>
			<p class="t0">They never left uncared for<span class="hst">  </span>Hilda the queen, and eke Gu-drun the maiden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last the men of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>into the hall were led.</p>
			<p class="t0">To them the queenly Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>kindly greeting made,</p>
			<p class="t0">As did Gu-drun the lady,<span class="hst">  </span>with fair and lofty bearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">But she, the high-born maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>love for Herwic in her heart was wearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Altho’ they felt unfriendly,<span class="hst">  </span>yet drink they gave to the men</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere yet they told their errand;<span class="hst">  </span>freely then the queen</p>
			<p class="t0">Bade them to be seated<span class="hst">  </span>before herself and her daughter.</p>
			<p class="t0">She begged them then to tell her:<span class="hst">  </span>“What boon to seek had brought them o’er the water?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All the men of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>before their seats yet stood,</p>
			<p class="t0">As well-bred men beseemeth,<span class="hst">  </span>and errand-bearers should.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then they told the ladies<span class="hst">  </span>what they would there be doing,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That for their master, Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>they for the fair Gu-drun had come a-wooing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high-born maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Of this I nought will hear,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That with the young King Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>I the crown should share,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before our friendly kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>and troth to him be plighted:</p>
			<p class="t0">The name of the knight is Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>whose love shall never by myself be slighted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“To him I am betrothed;<span class="hst">  </span>me he chose for a wife,</p>
			<p class="t0">And him for myself I have taken.<span class="hst">  </span>Ever, throughout his life,</p>
			<p class="t0">All of good I wish him<span class="hst">  </span>that can henceforth befall him:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er, till my days are ended,<span class="hst">  </span>will I ask the love of another, or my lord will call him.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One of them then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“This warning Hartmut gives:</p>
			<p class="t0">If nay shall be your answer,<span class="hst">  </span>before three days, if he lives,</p>
			<p class="t0">Against great Matelan castle<span class="hst">  </span>you shall see him leading</p>
			<p class="t0">All his knightly followers.”<span class="hst">  </span>Smiles at this were the maiden’s face o’erspreading.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Their leave they would be taking,<span class="hst">  </span>and hasten on their way,</p>
			<p class="t0">Those two great earls so haughty;<span class="hst">  </span>but Hilda bade them stay.</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ she ne’er had known them,<span class="hst">  </span>of gifts she was not chary;</p>
			<p class="t0">But yet they would not take them,<span class="hst">  </span>for crafty men were they, and in truth were wary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At those sent there by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel’s followers sneered,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said, their scorn and anger<span class="hst">  </span>they very little feared:</p>
			<p class="t0">If to drink the wine of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>they were, in truth, unwilling,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then this warning gave they:<span class="hst">  </span>that they their cup with blood would soon be filling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they had heard this answer,<span class="hst">  </span>back to the shore they went</p>
			<p class="t0">Whence they had been by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>upon their errand sent.</p>
			<p class="t0">He then ran forth to meet them, to ask how they were treated,</p>
			<p class="t0">And what had them befallen,<span class="hst">  </span>and how his courtship by Gu-drun was greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then one of them thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“This to us they said:</p>
			<p class="t0">The high and queenly maiden<span class="hst">  </span>a lover long has had,</p>
			<p class="t0">For whom, beyond all others,<span class="hst">  </span>love in her heart she is feeling:</p>
			<p class="t0">If you will not taste their wine-cup,<span class="hst">  </span>they soon will fill to you, your life-blood spilling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Ah, woe is me!” said Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>when he this answer heard;</p>
			<p class="t0">“My heart is full of anger,<span class="hst">  </span>with shame I hear your word!</p>
			<p class="t0">Never men more friendly<span class="hst">  </span>shall I need, till I am dying,</p>
			<p class="t0">Than those who now will help me.”<span class="hst">  </span>Straightway his men upsprang, on the shore then lying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig now and Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>with their men, set out for war;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their banners high uplifted<span class="hst">  </span>in pride and wrath they bore.</p>
			<p class="t0">These from Matelan castle<span class="hst">  </span>were seen afar to shimmer:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Cheer up!” then said the maiden;<span class="hst">  </span>“Herwic and Hettel come! their weapons glimmer!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But Hilda saw the standard<span class="hst">  </span>bore not King Hettel’s mark:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ah, woe shall now betide us<span class="hst">  </span>before this day grows dark!</p>
			<p class="t0">To seek Gu-drun are coming<span class="hst">  </span>foemen grim and daring;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a well-made helmet<span class="hst">  </span>their blows shall hew before the night is nearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then her friendly Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>thus to Hilda spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“If those led on by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>to-day an onslaught make,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wounds we then must deal them,<span class="hst">  </span>and show we are the stronger.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda then gave bidding<span class="hst">  </span>to shut the castle gates, and wait no longer.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But the men of brave King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>followed not her hest;</p>
			<p class="t0">They who the castle guarded<span class="hst">  </span>thought to fight their best.</p>
			<p class="t0">They bade that now their banners<span class="hst">  </span>to the shafts be fastened;</p>
			<p class="t0">King Hettel’s daring followers,<span class="hst">  </span>to slay his foes, from out the castle hastened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The bars that should be lowered,<span class="hst">  </span>to keep the foemen out,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were left, in over-boldness,<span class="hst">  </span>and the gates not fully shut,</p>
			<p class="t0">Since from Hartmut’s foreguard<span class="hst">  </span>they little harm foreboded.</p>
			<p class="t0">But when they pressed in boldly,<span class="hst">  </span>then came the rest, who ever on them crowded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A thousand men or over<span class="hst">  </span>stood before the gate;</p>
			<p class="t0">These, their swords upbearing,<span class="hst">  </span>the fight did there await.</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand more with Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>now came thronging thickly;</p>
			<p class="t0">They then from their steeds alighted,<span class="hst">  </span>and back to the rear they sent their horses quickly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Spears in hand they carried,<span class="hst">  </span>with points full keen to cut.</p>
			<p class="t0">Who could shun their onset?<span class="hst">  </span>With heavy wounds they smote</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who the castle guarded,<span class="hst">  </span>in their pride o’erweening.</p>
			<p class="t0">Just at the hour came Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>with his Norman knights, as the fight was now beginning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Much the women sorrowed<span class="hst">  </span>as Ludwig nearer rode:</p>
			<p class="t0">The banners o’er them floating<span class="hst">  </span>well and proudly showed</p>
			<p class="t0">The fearless foe oncoming;<span class="hst">  </span>beneath each standard flocking,</p>
			<p class="t0">Three thousand now came boldly,<span class="hst">  </span>tho’ sad on their homeward way they might yet be looking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before the walls beleaguered<span class="hst">  </span>the guards were a busy band:</p>
			<p class="t0">Never hardier fighters<span class="hst">  </span>were seen in any land</p>
			<p class="t0">Than were the faithful warders<span class="hst">  </span>in Hettel’s castle dwelling;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their blows they were thickly dealing,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hartmut’s men their strength were quickly feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig, Hartmut’s father,<span class="hst">  </span>the Norman king, was seen</p>
			<p class="t0">From hardened rims of bucklers<span class="hst">  </span>to strike a fiery sheen:</p>
			<p class="t0">Truly, great was the bravery<span class="hst">  </span>that now his heart was swelling;</p>
			<p class="t0">His friends and followers also,<span class="hst">  </span>in the bloody game, were bold beyond all telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they who the castle guarded<span class="hst">  </span>hoped for rest and peace,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then their daring foemen<span class="hst">  </span>did nearer to them press,</p>
			<p class="t0">Led by him of Normandy:<span class="hst">  </span>the youthful Hartmut’s father</p>
			<p class="t0">Grudged no toil to help him;<span class="hst">  </span>and this from that day’s fight one well might gather.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the trustful warders<span class="hst">  </span>began in truth to mourn,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they, ’gainst Hilda’s bidding,<span class="hst">  </span>had their care forborne,—</p>
			<p class="t0">The hest of the wife of Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>the high and worthy lady.</p>
			<p class="t0">For this their shields were shattered,<span class="hst">  </span>and many a life was lost, in fight too ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig now and Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>on the field had met,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, holding speech together,<span class="hst">  </span>learned that, striving yet,</p>
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda’s men were seeking<span class="hst">  </span>the castle gates to fasten;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, with shields before them,<span class="hst">  </span>to bear their flags within they all did hasten.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Rocks were hurled from the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>and many spears were thrown,</p>
			<p class="t0">But the foe it hurt but little,<span class="hst">  </span>and his daring lessened none.</p>
			<p class="t0">Little thought was given<span class="hst">  </span>to the dead around them lying:</p>
			<p class="t0">With heavy stones down beaten,<span class="hst">  </span>many bold besiegers there fell dying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Hartmut and King Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>came within the gate,</p>
			<p class="t0">Many, badly wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>from them their death-stroke met.</p>
			<p class="t0">For this the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>began to sorrow sorely;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now in Hettel’s castle<span class="hst">  </span>the woe they wrought was growing greater hourly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the king of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>was glad enough, I ween,</p>
			<p class="t0">When to the halls of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>he could lead his men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bearing well their weapons:<span class="hst">  </span>soon his banner fluttered</p>
			<p class="t0">Over the roof of the castle.<span class="hst">  </span>Hilda at this her sorrow loudly uttered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Greatly do I wonder<span class="hst">  </span>what might these guests befall,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had now the grim old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>been there, and seen it all,</p>
			<p class="t0">The while the men of Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>with Ludwig, brave and daring,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thro’ the halls were rushing,<span class="hst">  </span>and from her home the fair Gu-drun were tearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Both Wâ-te and King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>if to them that day</p>
			<p class="t0">A warning had been given,<span class="hst">  </span>would stoutly have barred the way;</p>
			<p class="t0">They their foemen’s helmets<span class="hst">  </span>with swords would so have riven</p>
			<p class="t0">That back to their homes in Normandy,<span class="hst">  </span>without Gu-drun, would they have soon been driven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now within the castle<span class="hst">  </span>were all in saddest mood;</p>
			<p class="t0">So men to-day might sorrow.<span class="hst">  </span>Whate’er the foemen would,</p>
			<p class="t0">There did they lay hands on,<span class="hst">  </span>and took from out the dwelling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Rich grew Hartmut’s followers,—<span class="hst">  </span>you well may trust that I the truth am telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then came the bold young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>where he Gu-drun could see,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “Most worthy lady,<span class="hst">  </span>you erst looked down on me;</p>
			<p class="t0">But now both I and my followers<span class="hst">  </span>think of your kin so little,</p>
			<p class="t0">We will not seize and hold them,<span class="hst">  </span>but slay and hang them, so the strife to settle.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the maiden only:<span class="hst">  </span>“Alas! O father mine,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had you of this been knowing,<span class="hst">  </span>that I, a child of thine,</p>
			<p class="t0">One day from out your kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>would thus by foes be stolen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Never to me, poor maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>such woe and sorry shame had here befallen.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then was the gold and clothing<span class="hst">  </span>borne out by the robber band:</p>
			<p class="t0">Forth they took Queen Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>led by her snow-white hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Matelan’s goodly castle<span class="hst">  </span>they would have burned up gladly;</p>
			<p class="t0">For what became of the dwellers<span class="hst">  </span>the Normans never cared, nor thought of sadly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But Hartmut now had bidden<span class="hst">  </span>that it should not be burned,</p>
			<p class="t0">To leave the land he hastened,<span class="hst">  </span>and home again he turned,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before ’twas known to Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>who with his men was lying</p>
			<p class="t0">Within the Waalisch marches,<span class="hst">  </span>and there against his foe his strength was trying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Leave your stolen booty!”<span class="hst">  </span>to his men young Hartmut said;</p>
			<p class="t0">“At home my father’s riches<span class="hst">  </span>will I give to you instead:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus o’er the watery pathway<span class="hst">  </span>our sail will be the lighter.”</p>
			<p class="t0">To Gu-drun the hand of Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>brought a heavy wrong, and woe full bitter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They overthrew the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>the town with fire they burned;</p>
			<p class="t0">From it the best was taken;<span class="hst">  </span>with wealth they homeward turned:</p>
			<p class="t0">Two and sixty women<span class="hst">  </span>thence with them they carried,</p>
			<p class="t0">And many lovely maidens.<span class="hst">  </span>With heartfelt woe was queenly Hilda wearied.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">How were they filled with sadness<span class="hst">  </span>to leave the wine behind!</p>
			<p class="t0">Now did the queenly mother<span class="hst">  </span>a seat in the window find,</p>
			<p class="t0">And looked upon her daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>from home in sorrow turning.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a stately lady<span class="hst">  </span>the Normans left in tears, and bitterly mourning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Weeping now and wailing<span class="hst">  </span>was heard on either hand;</p>
			<p class="t0">No one there was happy,<span class="hst">  </span>when from the father-land</p>
			<p class="t0">The foe with Hilda’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>and with her maidens hasted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many, now but children,<span class="hst">  </span>for this, when men, to work them woe ne’er rested.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those who were seized by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>down to the shore he took;</p>
			<p class="t0">All their lands were wasted;<span class="hst">  </span>their homes went up in smoke.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now his hopes and wishes<span class="hst">  </span>happily were granted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Both Gu-drun and Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>he with him carried off,—the prize he wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Well he knew that Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>was many a league away,</p>
			<p class="t0">And war was grimly waging;<span class="hst">  </span>no more would Hartmut stay.</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet from the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>no whit too fast he speeded,</p>
			<p class="t0">For word was sent by Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>to Hettel and his friends, that much their help was needed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">How mournful were the tidings<span class="hst">  </span>before the king she laid!—</p>
			<p class="t0">That in his home and castle<span class="hst">  </span>his knights were lying dead,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or else were left by Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>now with death-wounds bleeding;</p>
			<p class="t0">That foes had seized his daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>and with her many maids were homeward speeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “Now tell King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>that I am here alone;</p>
			<p class="t0">Evil hath me o’ertaken, and now,<span class="hst">  </span>with pride o’ergrown,</p>
			<p class="t0">Our mighty foeman, Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>back to his land is faring;</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand men or better<span class="hst">  </span>lie at our gates, and the pains of death are bearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quickly then went Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and, ere three days were o’er,</p>
			<p class="t0">On board his keels was ready;<span class="hst">  </span>these the plunder bore,</p>
			<p class="t0">As much as they could carry,<span class="hst">  </span>whate’er his men had stolen.</p>
			<p class="t0">The men of brave King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>were dazed and stunned by all that had befallen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">What further did betide them,<span class="hst">  </span>who in truth can tell?</p>
			<p class="t0">Loud on the ear it sounded,<span class="hst">  </span>as they shifted the flapping sail,</p>
			<p class="t0">And away from the Hegeling kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>unto an isle forsaken,</p>
			<p class="t0">They their barks were turning;<span class="hst">  </span>the name of Wulpensand—or shore of the wolves—it had taken.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c16">Tale the Sixteenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HILDA SENT TO HETTEL AND HERWIC TO ASK THEIR HELP AGAINST HARTMUT.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The fair and queenly Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>with all her will and mind,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gave her thoughts now wholly<span class="hst">  </span>trusty men to find</p>
			<p class="t0">To bear the tale to Hettel.<span class="hst">  </span>Her heart indeed was riven</p>
			<p class="t0">By the wrongful deeds of Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and food for tears he to her eyes had given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To Herwic and her husband<span class="hst">  </span>she bade that it be said</p>
			<p class="t0">That foes had seized her daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>that many knights lay dead;</p>
			<p class="t0">And she was left in wretchedness,<span class="hst">  </span>lonely and forsaken;</p>
			<p class="t0">That all her gold and jewels<span class="hst">  </span>the Normans on their way had with them taken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quickly rode the heralds<span class="hst">  </span>and through the land they went:</p>
			<p class="t0">The queen in greatest sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>these on their way had sent.</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the seventh morning,<span class="hst">  </span>they came where they were greeted</p>
			<p class="t0">With the sight of beleaguering Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>who before their Moorland foes were seated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Oft in knightly matches<span class="hst">  </span>strove they every day,</p>
			<p class="t0">And one might also hear them<span class="hst">  </span>at many a game and play,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they might not be weary<span class="hst">  </span>who the siege were keeping;</p>
			<p class="t0">Some at a mark were shooting,<span class="hst">  </span>and others strove in running and in leaping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When by the Danish Horant<span class="hst">  </span>errand-bearers were seen</p>
			<p class="t0">Who to the land were coming,<span class="hst">  </span>thither sent by the queen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said he unto Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“With news for us they’re riding;</p>
			<p class="t0">May God in kindness grant it,<span class="hst">  </span>no ill to those at home is now betiding!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king himself went forward,<span class="hst">  </span>and met them where they stood.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said, with seemly bearing,<span class="hst">  </span>to them in their sorry mood:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Brave knights, I give you welcome<span class="hst">  </span>here to this far-off border.</p>
			<p class="t0">How fares it with Queen Hilda?<span class="hst">  </span>Who sent you here? and who is left to guard her?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Said one: “Your lady sent us;<span class="hst">  </span>to you for help she turns:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wasted are your castles;<span class="hst">  </span>your lands the foeman burns.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun from thence is carried;<span class="hst">  </span>her maidens, too, are taken:</p>
			<p class="t0">Never can your kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>from all these woes and ills again awaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This must I say, moreover,<span class="hst">  </span>we are in straitest need;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now of your men and kindred<span class="hst">  </span>a thousand there lie dead;</p>
			<p class="t0">And into far-off kingdoms<span class="hst">  </span>have foes your riches carried;</p>
			<p class="t0">Your hoard of wealth is scattered:<span class="hst">  </span>it shames good knights that thus your lands are harried.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The king then bade them tell him<span class="hst">  </span>who these deeds had done.</p>
			<p class="t0">One among them answered,<span class="hst">  </span>and their names to him made known:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ludwig was one, the Norman;<span class="hst">  </span>with many knights he fought us;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut, his son, was the other:<span class="hst">  </span>’twas they the inroad made, and havoc wrought us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then King Hettel answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To Hartmut I would not give,</p>
			<p class="t0">For his bride, Gu-drun my daughter;<span class="hst">  </span>for this he now doth strive</p>
			<p class="t0">To waste with war my kingdom.<span class="hst">  </span>I know his lands are holden</p>
			<p class="t0">Of Hagen, her mother’s father;<span class="hst">  </span>to woo her should his rank not him embolden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“To our beleaguered foemen<span class="hst">  </span>we nought of this must tell,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to our friends but whisper<span class="hst">  </span>the ills that us befell;</p>
			<p class="t0">We then must call our kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>hither to be hasting.</p>
			<p class="t0">Worse could never happen<span class="hst">  </span>unto good knights at home, from warfare resting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic then was bidden<span class="hst">  </span>to Hettel forthwith to go:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel’s friends and kindred<span class="hst">  </span>and his men were sent for, too.</p>
			<p class="t0">When now these knights so worthy<span class="hst">  </span>their way to him had taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">They found their king and master<span class="hst">  </span>dark in mind, and of every hope forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the lord of the Hegelings:<span class="hst">  </span>“To you I make my moan;</p>
			<p class="t0">And, trusting in your friendship,<span class="hst">  </span>my sorrows must I own:</p>
			<p class="t0">The queen, my Lady Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>has sent to give us warning,</p>
			<p class="t0">That the men of the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>are ill bestead, and bitterly are mourning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“My lands with fire are wasted,<span class="hst">  </span>and my castle broken down;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ill our walls were guarded<span class="hst">  </span>while we from home were gone:</p>
			<p class="t0">Foes have seized my daughter;<span class="hst">  </span>my kin in death are sleeping;</p>
			<p class="t0">My trusty men are slaughtered<span class="hst">  </span>to whom I left my land and name in keeping.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic now was weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>in his eyes the tear-drops stood;</p>
			<p class="t0">Wet were the eyes of Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>and fast they overflowed:</p>
			<p class="t0">So it was with others,<span class="hst">  </span>at seeing them thus weeping;</p>
			<p class="t0">Every one was sorrowful<span class="hst">  </span>who, near the king, his faith to him was keeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Further of this say nought.</p>
			<p class="t0">For all the woe and losses<span class="hst">  </span>these friends to us have brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon will we repay them,<span class="hst">  </span>and we shall yet be gladdened;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ludwig’s kin and Hartmut’s<span class="hst">  </span>shall at our hands for this erelong be saddened.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel asked in wonder:<span class="hst">  </span>“How can that be done?”</p>
			<p class="t0">To him old Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“’Tis best that peace be won</p>
			<p class="t0">Now with the king of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>with whom we yet are warring;</p>
			<p class="t0">Our men, who here besiege him,<span class="hst">  </span>to seek for fair Gu-drun we may then be sparing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wise was the aged Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>the words he spake were meet:</p>
			<p class="t0">“To-morrow morning early,<span class="hst">  </span>let us with Siegfried treat;</p>
			<p class="t0">And we ought so to bear us<span class="hst">  </span>that he shall well be knowing</p>
			<p class="t0">That, should we not allow it,<span class="hst">  </span>he with his men can ne’er be homeward going.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the daring Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“Wâ-te has spoken right;</p>
			<p class="t0">To-day must you be thinking<span class="hst">  </span>how, with the morrow’s light,</p>
			<p class="t0">You all before the foeman<span class="hst">  </span>may show a warlike bearing:</p>
			<p class="t0">It gives me pain that women<span class="hst">  </span>should make us leave our siege, and hence be faring.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then they got together<span class="hst">  </span>horses and clothes with speed;</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the words of Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>they readily gave heed.</p>
			<p class="t0">When the day was dawning,<span class="hst">  </span>they again were striving</p>
			<p class="t0">’Gainst those from Abakia.<span class="hst">  </span>Great praise for this were all to them soon giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On every side, with banners,<span class="hst">  </span>they to the field did throng;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many, sound in body,<span class="hst">  </span>there were slain erelong:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te’s men from Sturmland<span class="hst">  </span>“Nearer! Nearer!” shouted;</p>
			<p class="t0">But those they would o’ermaster<span class="hst">  </span>were quicker yet in fight, and nought it booted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon the knightly Irold,<span class="hst">  </span>over the edge of his shield,</p>
			<p class="t0">Called out, “Men of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>to peace with us will you yield?</p>
			<p class="t0">King Hettel bids us ask you,<span class="hst">  </span>will you this be choosing?</p>
			<p class="t0">Your lands so far are lying,<span class="hst">  </span>that you your goods and men will else be losing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Siegfried, lord of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>answered to him thus:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Would you for peace have pledges,<span class="hst">  </span>then win the fight o’er us;</p>
			<p class="t0">With no one will I bargain<span class="hst">  </span>for aught my name may lessen:</p>
			<p class="t0">If you think to overcome us,<span class="hst">  </span>you will the more by this your losses hasten.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Fru-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“If help to us you’ll give,</p>
			<p class="t0">And pledge your word to do it,<span class="hst">  </span>your stronghold you may leave</p>
			<p class="t0">And go from my master’s kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>without more bloody fighting.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The Moors from Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>on this stretched forth the hand, their faith thus plighting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There came to strife a stand-still,<span class="hst">  </span>this I for truth may say.</p>
			<p class="t0">The glad and happy warriors<span class="hst">  </span>met that selfsame day;</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who erst were foemen<span class="hst">  </span>their help to each other granted.</p>
			<p class="t0">They both had quenched their hatred;<span class="hst">  </span>to fight the Normans now was all they wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to Siegfried of Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>at once King Hettel told</p>
			<p class="t0">All the heavy tidings<span class="hst">  </span>that he in his breast did hold;</p>
			<p class="t0">He pledged to him his friendship,<span class="hst">  </span>so long as he was living,</p>
			<p class="t0">If Hartmut’s foul misdoing<span class="hst">  </span>now to repay, his help he would be giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him the lord of Alzabie,<span class="hst">  </span>the Moorish Siegfried said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Knew we where to find them,<span class="hst">  </span>they should our coming dread.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The aged Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“I can show you nearly</p>
			<p class="t0">Their path across the water:<span class="hst">  </span>and we perhaps on the sea may meet them early.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to them all spake Hettel:<span class="hst">  </span>“Where can ships be sought?</p>
			<p class="t0">And, if I wish to harm them,<span class="hst">  </span>how bring my wish about?</p>
			<p class="t0">I might at home make ready<span class="hst">  </span>within their lands to seek them,</p>
			<p class="t0">And there, when I had found them,<span class="hst">  </span>my anger for my wrongs should quick o’ertake them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him then said old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“In this I can help you still;</p>
			<p class="t0">God is ever mighty<span class="hst">  </span>to do whate’er he will.</p>
			<p class="t0">I know within these borders<span class="hst">  </span>now are lying near us</p>
			<p class="t0">Well-made ships full seventy;<span class="hst">  </span>filled with food, these barks from the sands will bear us.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“In them have wandering pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>sailed the waters o’er:</p>
			<p class="t0">Their ships, whatever happens,<span class="hst">  </span>we must seize upon the shore;</p>
			<p class="t0">The pilgrims must be willing<span class="hst">  </span>that on the sand we leave them,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until our Norman foemen<span class="hst">  </span>make good our wrongs, or we again shall brave them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At once old Wâ-te started,<span class="hst">  </span>no longer would he wait;</p>
			<p class="t0">A hundred knights went with him,<span class="hst">  </span>the others lingered yet.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said he came for buying;<span class="hst">  </span>what could the pilgrims sell him?</p>
			<p class="t0">For this men died thereafter,<span class="hst">  </span>and, for himself, but sorry luck befell him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On the shore he found the pilgrims,—<span class="hst">  </span>this I know is true,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Fully thirty hundred,<span class="hst">  </span>I ween, and better, too.</p>
			<p class="t0">To fight were they unready,<span class="hst">  </span>and could not rouse them quickly:</p>
			<p class="t0">Nearer came King Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>and with him led his men, now crowding thickly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Their goods the pilgrims guarded,<span class="hst">  </span>yet Wâ-te sent on shore</p>
			<p class="t0">All that he had no need for,<span class="hst">  </span>of silver and clothes a store;</p>
			<p class="t0">But the food was left on shipboard,<span class="hst">  </span>so old Wâ-te chooses:</p>
			<p class="t0">He said he should come hereafter,<span class="hst">  </span>and would reward them well for all their losses.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Sadly mourned the pilgrims,<span class="hst">  </span>for sorest was their need;</p>
			<p class="t0">But for all they said old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>cared not a crust of bread:</p>
			<p class="t0">The bold, unyielding warrior,<span class="hst">  </span>stern and never smiling,</p>
			<p class="t0">Said: “Both ships and flatboats<span class="hst">  </span>they to leave to him must now be willing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hettel recked but little<span class="hst">  </span>if ever they sailed again</p>
			<p class="t0">Over the sea with their crosses:<span class="hst">  </span>then he took of their men</p>
			<p class="t0">Five hundred at least, or over,<span class="hst">  </span>the best they had among them;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of these to the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>few came back, from the death that overhung them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">I know not whether Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>atoned for his evil deed</p>
			<p class="t0">Done to these poor pilgrims,<span class="hst">  </span>that made their hearts to bleed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, in a far-off kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>rent their band, to their sorrow.</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween the God in heaven<span class="hst">  </span>saw the wrong, and his anger showed on the morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">King Hettel and his followers<span class="hst">  </span>met with a kindly breeze,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now their way were taking<span class="hst">  </span>quickly across the seas;</p>
			<p class="t0">Seeking for their foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>they sailed far over the water,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wherever they might find them,<span class="hst">  </span>longing to show their wrath, and bent on slaughter.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c17">Tale the Seventeenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HETTEL CAME TO THE WULPENSAND IN SEARCH OF HIS DAUGHTER.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig, king of the Normans,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hartmut, too, his son,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now, with all their followers,<span class="hst">  </span>far away had gone,</p>
			<p class="t0">And on a lone, wild seashore,<span class="hst">  </span>after their toil, were resting.</p>
			<p class="t0">Though many there were gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>yet little happiness they then were tasting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">’Twas on a broad, low island,<span class="hst">  </span>hight the Wulpensand,</p>
			<p class="t0">That now the brave King Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>and they of the Norman land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Shelter for men and horses<span class="hst">  </span>had found unto their liking;</p>
			<p class="t0">But a doom to them most woful<span class="hst">  </span>erelong must come, instead of the rest they were seeking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The very high-born maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>torn from the Hegeling land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had been led out, and wandered<span class="hst">  </span>along the barren sand;</p>
			<p class="t0">So far as ’twas allowed them<span class="hst">  </span>to show their feelings freely,</p>
			<p class="t0">They who had been stolen<span class="hst">  </span>in sadness wept before the foeman daily.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Fires upon the seashore<span class="hst">  </span>were seen on every side;</p>
			<p class="t0">The men from far-off Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>were thinking there to abide.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gladly with the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>would they seven days have rested,</p>
			<p class="t0">And there have made them lodgings;<span class="hst">  </span>but every hope of this erelong was blasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While on this isle forsaken<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut now must stay,</p>
			<p class="t0">Loth were he and his followers<span class="hst">  </span>the hope to put away,</p>
			<p class="t0">Which till now they fostered,<span class="hst">  </span>that they for rest might tarry</p>
			<p class="t0">Throughout a week in the shelter<span class="hst">  </span>whither they the maidens fair did carry.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">It was from far-off Matelan<span class="hst">  </span>that Ludwig and his band</p>
			<p class="t0">The fair Gu-drun had taken<span class="hst">  </span>unto this lonely strand;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor felt they now uneasy<span class="hst">  </span>lest to their hidden dwelling</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te them should follow,<span class="hst">  </span>and never harm from him were they foretelling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now saw King Ludwig’s sailors,<span class="hst">  </span>tossing on the wave,</p>
			<p class="t0">A ship with sails the richest.<span class="hst">  </span>To the king they warning gave;</p>
			<p class="t0">But when ’twas seen by Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and others with him standing,</p>
			<p class="t0">That on the sails were crosses,<span class="hst">  </span>they said these must be pilgrims, bent on landing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On the waters floating<span class="hst">  </span>three good ships were seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">With new and well-made flatboats;<span class="hst">  </span>they bore across the main</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who on their clothing<span class="hst">  </span>never yet wore crosses,</p>
			<p class="t0">Their love to God thus showing.<span class="hst">  </span>The Normans must from them meet heavy losses.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As they the shore were nearing,<span class="hst">  </span>one on the ships might see</p>
			<p class="t0">Helmets brightly shining.<span class="hst">  </span>No more from care were free</p>
			<p class="t0">King Ludwig and his kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>and harm their fears foreboded:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Look there!” then shouted Hartmut;<span class="hst">  </span>“with grimmest foes of mine these ships are loaded.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The ships were turned so quickly<span class="hst">  </span>that now men loudly heard</p>
			<p class="t0">Rudders strained and cracking,<span class="hst">  </span>held by those who steered.</p>
			<p class="t0">Both the young and aged,<span class="hst">  </span>who on the sea-sands rested,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were indeed bewildered<span class="hst">  </span>when to spring on shore the foeman hasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig and young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>their shields in hand now bore.</p>
			<p class="t0">For them it had been easier<span class="hst">  </span>to reach their homes once more</p>
			<p class="t0">If they had not too freely<span class="hst">  </span>their rest on the island taken:</p>
			<p class="t0">They had falsely reckoned<span class="hst">  </span>that Hettel had now no friends, and was all forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig called out loudly<span class="hst">  </span>to all his trusty men,</p>
			<p class="t0">(He thought it child’s play only<span class="hst">  </span>that he before had seen,)</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now with worthy foemen<span class="hst">  </span>must I, at length, be striving!</p>
			<p class="t0">He shall be the richer<span class="hst">  </span>who ’neath my flag his help to me is giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon was Hartmut’s banner<span class="hst">  </span>raised upon the shore.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ships had now come nearer;<span class="hst">  </span>with spears the Normans bore</p>
			<p class="t0">To reach the foe were easy<span class="hst">  </span>from where they now were waiting:</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>was ready with his shield, the foeman meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ne’er before so grimly<span class="hst">  </span>did champions guard their land.</p>
			<p class="t0">Boldly the Hegeling warriors<span class="hst">  </span>nearer pressed to the strand;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon they met the Normans<span class="hst">  </span>with sword and spear, undaunted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Blows they freely bartered:<span class="hst">  </span>such bargains cheaply given no more they wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Everywhere the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>sprang upon the shore.</p>
			<p class="t0">After a wind from the hill-tops<span class="hst">  </span>was never seen before</p>
			<p class="t0">Snow so thickly whirling<span class="hst">  </span>as spears from hands that threw them:</p>
			<p class="t0">Though they had done it gladly<span class="hst">  </span>idle it were to shun the strokes that slew them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thick fly the spears on both sides:<span class="hst">  </span>the time but slowly goes,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till they on the beach are standing.<span class="hst">  </span>Quickly on his foes</p>
			<p class="t0">Sprang the aged Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>just as they were nearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">His mood was of the grimmest,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon they saw what mind he now was bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig, king of the Normans,<span class="hst">  </span>then at Wâ-te ran,</p>
			<p class="t0">And hurled a spear well sharpened<span class="hst">  </span>against the brave old man.</p>
			<p class="t0">The shaft, in splinters shattered,<span class="hst">  </span>high thro’ air went crashing,</p>
			<p class="t0">For Ludwig drove it bravely;<span class="hst">  </span>soon to the fight came Wâ-te’s kinsmen dashing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With a heavy stroke, old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>Ludwig’s helmet cut;</p>
			<p class="t0">The edge of the sword he wielded<span class="hst">  </span>the head of his foeman smote,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who beneath his breastplate<span class="hst">  </span>a shirt of silk was wearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">(In Abalie ’twas woven;)<span class="hst">  </span>were it not for this, his end he must be nearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hardly from him could Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>with life and limb go free;</p>
			<p class="t0">The spot he would fain be leaving,<span class="hst">  </span>for Wâ-te was ill to see</p>
			<p class="t0">When he was roused to anger,<span class="hst">  </span>and to win the day was trying:</p>
			<p class="t0">Struck by his hand were many,<span class="hst">  </span>who, brave in warfare, now on the field lay dying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold and young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>each on the other sprang:</p>
			<p class="t0">On either side their weapons<span class="hst">  </span>on the foeman’s helmet rang;</p>
			<p class="t0">Throughout the throng of fighters,<span class="hst">  </span>all could hear it loudly;</p>
			<p class="t0">For bold in war was Irold,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hartmut, too, was brave, and bore him proudly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic from the Sealands,<span class="hst">  </span>a warrior strong and good,</p>
			<p class="t0">Could not reach the landing,<span class="hst">  </span>but leaped into the flood,</p>
			<p class="t0">And in the waves was standing,<span class="hst">  </span>up to his shoulders hidden.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon to his cost was he learning<span class="hst">  </span>how hard a task it is to win a maiden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They the shore who guarded<span class="hst">  </span>their foemen thought to drown</p>
			<p class="t0">While in the waters struggling.<span class="hst">  </span>Shafts at them were thrown,</p>
			<p class="t0">And many on them broken;<span class="hst">  </span>but they, their foes now seeking,</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon the sands were treading,<span class="hst">  </span>and many a knight his wrath on them was wreaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ere they had reached the shoreland,<span class="hst">  </span>one saw the watery flood</p>
			<p class="t0">Dyed by the killed and wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>in hue as red as blood;</p>
			<p class="t0">Everywhere, so widely<span class="hst">  </span>the reddened waves were flowing,</p>
			<p class="t0">One could not shoot beyond them,<span class="hst">  </span>how far soe’er he might his spear be throwing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Heavier toil and losses<span class="hst">  </span>heroes never found,</p>
			<p class="t0">And never so many warriors<span class="hst">  </span>lay trampled on the ground:</p>
			<p class="t0">Enough were they for a kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>who lay, unwounded, dying.</p>
			<p class="t0">The Normans who o’erthrew them,<span class="hst">  </span>on all sides too, I ween, in death were lying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">It was to save his daughter<span class="hst">  </span>that there King Hettel fought,</p>
			<p class="t0">And all his kinsmen with him.<span class="hst">  </span>On every side were wrought,</p>
			<p class="t0">By him and those who helped him,<span class="hst">  </span>havoc and bitter sorrow.</p>
			<p class="t0">Dead on the Wulpensand<span class="hst">  </span>were many bodies found before the morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Unto their lords all faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>they strove upon the sand,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Alike the men of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>and they of the Hegeling land.</p>
			<p class="t0">Warriors brave from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>fought with matchless daring;</p>
			<p class="t0">He ne’er should wait their onset<span class="hst">  </span>who much for his welfare or his life was caring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Morunc and with him Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>boldly held their ground,</p>
			<p class="t0">And for themselves won honor;<span class="hst">  </span>nowhere could be found</p>
			<p class="t0">Men who greater slaughter<span class="hst">  </span>wrought, with hearts undaunted:</p>
			<p class="t0">The heroes twain, with their followers,<span class="hst">  </span>gave full many wounds, with spears well planted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Proudly the men from Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>as I have heard it said,</p>
			<p class="t0">When from their ships they landed,<span class="hst">  </span>the way to the foemen led.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel hoped, in his struggle,<span class="hst">  </span>help from them to be gaining,</p>
			<p class="t0">For they were daring fighters:<span class="hst">  </span>one saw the blood beneath their helmets raining.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">How could he who led them<span class="hst">  </span>have braver or bolder been?</p>
			<p class="t0">That day he dimmed with life-blood<span class="hst">  </span>many breastplates’ sheen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Siegfried it was, unyielding<span class="hst">  </span>in storm of battle ever.</p>
			<p class="t0">How could the Danish Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>or even Wâ-te the old, have shown them braver?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thickly hurled were lances,<span class="hst">  </span>hither and thither thrown:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortwin, with his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>in hopeful mood came on;</p>
			<p class="t0">Helmets that day he shattered,<span class="hst">  </span>blows upon them dealing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun was bitterly weeping:<span class="hst">  </span>her women, too, were deepest sorrow feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The strife, on both sides, lasted<span class="hst">  </span>throughout the livelong day;</p>
			<p class="t0">Longing to reach each other,<span class="hst">  </span>they crowded to the fray.</p>
			<p class="t0">There to knights and warriors<span class="hst">  </span>must the fight go badly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where the friends of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>to win his daughter back were striving gladly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The evening sun sank lower;<span class="hst">  </span>and for King Hettel now</p>
			<p class="t0">His losses grew the greater.<span class="hst">  </span>King Ludwig’s men, I trow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Did their best in fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>but could not flee the slaughter;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their foes they wounded deeply,<span class="hst">  </span>and guarded thus Gu-drun from those who sought her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The strife began at morning;<span class="hst">  </span>by night alone ’twas stopped,</p>
			<p class="t0">And steadily had lasted;<span class="hst">  </span>they ne’er their weapons dropped.</p>
			<p class="t0">The old and young together<span class="hst">  </span>gained no shame in fighting.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the brave King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>forward pressed, the king of the Normans meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c18">Tale the Eighteenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW LUDWIG SLEW HETTEL, AND STOLE AWAY IN THE NIGHT.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">High in hand their weapons<span class="hst">  </span>Hettel and Ludwig bore,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Well had they been sharpened.<span class="hst">  </span>Soon each knew the more</p>
			<p class="t0">Who was now his foeman,<span class="hst">  </span>such strength they both were showing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ludwig slew King Hettel;<span class="hst">  </span>and out of this our mournful tale is growing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the lord of Matelan<span class="hst">  </span>upon the field lay slain,</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon ’twas told to his daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>loudly then began</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun to mourn her father,<span class="hst">  </span>so did many a maiden;</p>
			<p class="t0">Not one could stop her wailing:<span class="hst">  </span>friends and foes alike were sorrow-laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as the grim old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>the death of the king did know,</p>
			<p class="t0">He cried and roared in anger.<span class="hst">  </span>Like to the evening glow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now were helmets blazing,<span class="hst">  </span>beneath the strokes quick given</p>
			<p class="t0">By him and all his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>who by their loss were unto madness driven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">However hard their fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>how could it bring them good?</p>
			<p class="t0">Drenched was all the island<span class="hst">  </span>with many knights’ hot blood.</p>
			<p class="t0">Not yet the Hegeling warriors<span class="hst">  </span>to think of peace were ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">Away from the Wulpensand<span class="hst">  </span>they only wished to bring Gu-drun, their lady.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In stormy fight the Waal men<span class="hst">  </span>bewreked the death of the king;</p>
			<p class="t0">To many a fighting Ortlander<span class="hst">  </span>and hard-pressed Hegeling</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who came from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>of friendship gave a token:</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon these knights so daring<span class="hst">  </span>found in their hands their trusty weapons broken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now to avenge his father<span class="hst">  </span>Ortwin bravely strove:</p>
			<p class="t0">Faithful to him did Horant<span class="hst">  </span>and all his followers prove.</p>
			<p class="t0">Night the field had darkened,<span class="hst">  </span>the light of day was failing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then were given to many<span class="hst">  </span>wounds from which the life-blood fast was welling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon, in the dark, on Horant<span class="hst">  </span>a Danish follower sprang;</p>
			<p class="t0">The sword that he was holding<span class="hst">  </span>loud on the armor rang:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thinking he was a foeman,<span class="hst">  </span>Horant at once upon him</p>
			<p class="t0">Wrought most bitter sorrow:<span class="hst">  </span>a deadly wound by that warrior brave was done him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Horant saw that his kinsman<span class="hst">  </span>beneath his blow lay dead,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he bade that his banner<span class="hst">  </span>be borne with his own o’erhead.</p>
			<p class="t0">The voice of him who was dying<span class="hst">  </span>told whose life he had taken</p>
			<p class="t0">With his hand so rashly;<span class="hst">  </span>sorely he mourned the friend who never would waken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Loudly called out Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“Murder here is done!</p>
			<p class="t0">Since we can see no longer,<span class="hst">  </span>and daylight now is gone,</p>
			<p class="t0">We all shall kill each other,<span class="hst">  </span>friends and foes together.</p>
			<p class="t0">If this shall last till morning,<span class="hst">  </span>two may be left to fight, but not another.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Where’er they saw old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>on the stormy fighting-ground,</p>
			<p class="t0">No one there was willing<span class="hst">  </span>near him to be found;</p>
			<p class="t0">No welcome, in his madness,<span class="hst">  </span>was he to any giving:</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a foe he wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>and laid on the spot that he would ne’er be leaving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">’Twas well the foes were sundered<span class="hst">  </span>until the break of day;</p>
			<p class="t0">On either side the foemen<span class="hst">  </span>near each other lay,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wounded to death or slaughtered.<span class="hst">  </span>Fast the light was waning,</p>
			<p class="t0">Not yet the moon was risen,<span class="hst">  </span>and the Hegeling foe the field were nowhere gaining.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The warriors grim, unwillingly,<span class="hst">  </span>to the strife now put a stop;</p>
			<p class="t0">The hands of all were weary<span class="hst">  </span>ere they gave the struggle up:</p>
			<p class="t0">But, when the fight was over,<span class="hst">  </span>they near each other loitered.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wherever fires were burning,<span class="hst">  </span>for each the other’s shields and helmets glittered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig then and Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>lords of the Norman land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Talked aside together.<span class="hst">  </span>Then to his faithful band</p>
			<p class="t0">Spake the elder warrior:<span class="hst">  </span>“Why be longer staying</p>
			<p class="t0">So near the brave old Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>who all of us is madly bent on slaying?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The wily king then bade them:<span class="hst">  </span>“Lie low, and be not seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">With your heads upon your bucklers:<span class="hst">  </span>you then must make a din;</p>
			<p class="t0">And so the men of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>my plan will not be knowing,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That, if I now can do it,<span class="hst">  </span>I with you all may hence unseen be going.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig’s men and kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>did as he had said:</p>
			<p class="t0">They upon their sackbuts<span class="hst">  </span>and trumpets loudly played,</p>
			<p class="t0">As if they, by their prowess,<span class="hst">  </span>the land had gained them wholly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ludwig now to his followers<span class="hst">  </span>showed his crafty plot and cunning fully.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then were heard, on all sides,<span class="hst">  </span>mingled shouts and cries;</p>
			<p class="t0">But wailing from the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>was not allowed to rise:</p>
			<p class="t0">All who would not stop it<span class="hst">  </span>were threatened death by drowning,—</p>
			<p class="t0">To be sunk beneath the waters,—<span class="hst">  </span>if they were sobbing heard, or loudly moaning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whate’er was owned by the Normans<span class="hst">  </span>now to the ships was ta’en;</p>
			<p class="t0">The dead were there left lying,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en where they were slain.</p>
			<p class="t0">Friends were lost to many<span class="hst">  </span>who, seeking, could not find them:</p>
			<p class="t0">So few there were still living,<span class="hst">  </span>that many an empty ship was left behind them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thus unbeknown and slyly,<span class="hst">  </span>sailed away o’er the main</p>
			<p class="t0">The men of the land of Normandy;<span class="hst">  </span>great was the women’s pain</p>
			<p class="t0">From kinsfolk to be sundered,<span class="hst">  </span>and yet to hush their weeping.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of this the men knew nothing<span class="hst">  </span>who now upon the Wulpensand were sleeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before the day was dawning,<span class="hst">  </span>well were on their way</p>
			<p class="t0">They whom the Danish warriors<span class="hst">  </span>had thought that morn to slay.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Wâ-te bade that loudly<span class="hst">  </span>his war-horn should be sounded;</p>
			<p class="t0">He was in haste to follow,<span class="hst">  </span>and hoped erelong to fell them, deeply wounded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On foot and on their horses,<span class="hst">  </span>the men of the Hegeling land</p>
			<p class="t0">All were seen together,<span class="hst">  </span>flocking o’er the sand,</p>
			<p class="t0">To fight the fleeing Normans;<span class="hst">  </span>never in this they rested.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ludwig with his followers<span class="hst">  </span>already far upon their way had hasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Many ships lay empty,<span class="hst">  </span>and clothing there was found;</p>
			<p class="t0">All about the Wulpensand<span class="hst">  </span>’twas scattered o’er the ground;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many weapons also<span class="hst">  </span>were seen, with none to bear them.</p>
			<p class="t0">They had overslept their going,<span class="hst">  </span>and never to harm their foes could they come near them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When this was told to Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>with anger he was torn:</p>
			<p class="t0">How for the death of Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>he bitterly did mourn!</p>
			<p class="t0">And that on Ludwig’s body<span class="hst">  </span>his wrath he was not wreaking!</p>
			<p class="t0">Helmets there lay shattered;<span class="hst">  </span>for this must many a woman’s heart be aching.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">How gloomily and sadly<span class="hst">  </span>now, in angry mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortwin was bewailing<span class="hst">  </span>the loss of his warriors good!</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Rouse up, my fighters!<span class="hst">  </span>we may perhaps o’ertake them</p>
			<p class="t0">Before they leave these waters;<span class="hst">  </span>not far from shore we yet in flight may check them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Willingly old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>would his bidding do:</p>
			<p class="t0">Fru-te the winds was watching,<span class="hst">  </span>to learn which way they blew.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said he to his kinsmen:<span class="hst">  </span>“What helps it though we hasten?</p>
			<p class="t0">Mark what now I tell you:<span class="hst">  </span>the thirty miles they’ve gained we ne’er can lessen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Moreover, we of fighters<span class="hst">  </span>have not here enough</p>
			<p class="t0">That we in aught can harm them,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en should we now set off:</p>
			<p class="t0">Scorn me not,” said Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>“and to my words give heeding;</p>
			<p class="t0">What more to say is needful?<span class="hst">  </span>Your foes you cannot reach, howe’er you’re speeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Bid that now the wounded<span class="hst">  </span>upon the ships be laid;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then on the field of battle<span class="hst">  </span>let search for the dead be made,</p>
			<p class="t0">And bid that they be buried<span class="hst">  </span>upon this strand forsaken,</p>
			<p class="t0">So friends may rest together;<span class="hst">  </span>this good at least from them should not be taken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All, standing there together,<span class="hst">  </span>wringing their hands were seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">For this one sorrow only,<span class="hst">  </span>would their lot have hapless been,—</p>
			<p class="t0">To lose the youthful maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>Hilda’s lovely daughter.</p>
			<p class="t0">How, when they saw her mother,<span class="hst">  </span>if home they went, could news so sad be brought her?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to them said Morunc:<span class="hst">  </span>“Would there were nothing more,</p>
			<p class="t0">Beyond our own sad losses,<span class="hst">  </span>for which our hearts are sore!</p>
			<p class="t0">Small reward will be given<span class="hst">  </span>for the news we home shall carry,</p>
			<p class="t0">That Hettel dead is lying:<span class="hst">  </span>far from Hilda fain would I longer tarry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then went the warriors searching<span class="hst">  </span>for the dead upon the sand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those they knew were Christians<span class="hst">  </span>who lay upon the strand,</p>
			<p class="t0">As the Sturmisch Wâ-te bade them,<span class="hst">  </span>were all together carried;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then both the old and the younger<span class="hst">  </span>chose a spot whereon the dead were buried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the knight, young Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“Let us bury them here;</p>
			<p class="t0">And thought must we be taking<span class="hst">  </span>to build a church full near,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they be not forgotten,<span class="hst">  </span>while this their end is showing.</p>
			<p class="t0">For it shall all their kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>give of their wealth, each one his share bestowing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the Sturmisch Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“In this thou well hast said;</p>
			<p class="t0">We now should sell the horses<span class="hst">  </span>and the clothing of the dead,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who on the shore are lying;<span class="hst">  </span>so, since their life is ended,</p>
			<p class="t0">Shall many poor and needy,<span class="hst">  </span>with the wealth they left, be holpen and befriended.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then asked the warrior Irold, if foes who there lay dead</p>
			<p class="t0">Should also now be buried,<span class="hst">  </span>or if wolves should on them feed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And hungry ravens tear them,<span class="hst">  </span>that round their bodies hovered?</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to the wise they listened;<span class="hst">  </span>none of the dead were left on the field uncovered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the fight was over,<span class="hst">  </span>and all were free from care,</p>
			<p class="t0">Hettel, their king, they buried,<span class="hst">  </span>who for his daughter dear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon this barren seashore,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en unto death had striven.</p>
			<p class="t0">To others who had fallen,<span class="hst">  </span>whate’er their land and name, was burial given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First, the men from Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>each by himself they laid;</p>
			<p class="t0">The same was done for the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>found among the dead;</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the Normans, also,<span class="hst">  </span>gave they graves allotted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Alone was each one buried,<span class="hst">  </span>if Christian he were or heathen, it nothing booted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Until six days were over,<span class="hst">  </span>busy were they, at their best,</p>
			<p class="t0">And never time were finding<span class="hst">  </span>(for the warriors took no rest)</p>
			<p class="t0">To ask for dead and dying<span class="hst">  </span>the grace of God in heaven,</p>
			<p class="t0">For sins of which they were guilty;<span class="hst">  </span>that they for their misdeeds should be forgiven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Saying mass and singing<span class="hst">  </span>were later heard on the strand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never was God so worshipped,<span class="hst">  </span>in any other land,</p>
			<p class="t0">For the dead in stormy fighting.<span class="hst">  </span>Wherever men were lying</p>
			<p class="t0">With their death-wounds smitten,<span class="hst">  </span>holy priests they brought to shrive the dying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Many there did tarry<span class="hst">  </span>to care for the churchly men.</p>
			<p class="t0">A deed of gift was written,<span class="hst">  </span>wherein it could be seen</p>
			<p class="t0">How of land to the brothers<span class="hst">  </span>three hundred hides was given.</p>
			<p class="t0">Far and wide ’twas bruited,<span class="hst">  </span>that well a godly house was builded, and had thriven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All who there were mourning<span class="hst">  </span>the loss of friends and kin</p>
			<p class="t0">Gave of their wealth a tithing,<span class="hst">  </span>women as well as men,</p>
			<p class="t0">For weal of the souls of any<span class="hst">  </span>whose bodies there lay buried.</p>
			<p class="t0">The cloister soon was wealthy,<span class="hst">  </span>by the yield of three hundred hides, through toil unwearied.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now may God in his keeping<span class="hst">  </span>have those who there lie dead,</p>
			<p class="t0">And the holy men there dwelling.<span class="hst">  </span>Those then homeward sped</p>
			<p class="t0">Who still upon the Wulpensand<span class="hst">  </span>were left among the living;</p>
			<p class="t0">After all their sorrows,<span class="hst">  </span>they reached their fatherland, no more in warfare striving.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c19">Tale the Nineteenth.<br/><span class="small">HOW THE HEGELINGS WENT HOME TO THEIR OWN LAND.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The kinsmen of King Hettel<span class="hst">  </span>upon the sands had left</p>
			<p class="t0">Many in death’s fast keeping;<span class="hst">  </span>never knights bereft</p>
			<p class="t0">Their homeward way had taken,<span class="hst">  </span>hearts so sorry bringing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thereafter lovely women<span class="hst">  </span>for this, with weeping eyes, their hands were wringing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortwin, the knight of Ortland,<span class="hst">  </span>who to the fight had come,</p>
			<p class="t0">After such shame and losses,<span class="hst">  </span>back to fair Hilda’s home</p>
			<p class="t0">Feared to bring these tidings,<span class="hst">  </span>his mother dear to sadden.</p>
			<p class="t0">She there was waiting daily,<span class="hst">  </span>hoping her men would bring Gu-drun the maiden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, fearing sorely,<span class="hst">  </span>rode to Hilda’s land;</p>
			<p class="t0">The others dared not tell her<span class="hst">  </span>of the loss on the Wulpensand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ill in the storm of fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>his strength her men had warded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Not lightly her forgiveness<span class="hst">  </span>he hoped to gain, who thus her lord had guarded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the word was spoken<span class="hst">  </span>that Wâ-te near had come,</p>
			<p class="t0">At once were men faint-hearted.<span class="hst">  </span>Erewhiles when he came home,</p>
			<p class="t0">Back from the war-field riding,<span class="hst">  </span>it was with war-horns braying.</p>
			<p class="t0">This he did at all times;<span class="hst">  </span>but now they all were still, and nought were saying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Woe’s me!” said Lady Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>“what sorrows must we fear?</p>
			<p class="t0">The men of the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>shattered shields now bear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Slowly step the horses,<span class="hst">  </span>with armor heavy-loaded.</p>
			<p class="t0">Some evil has befallen.<span class="hst">  </span>Oh! say what harm to the king is now forboded?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When thus the queen had spoken,<span class="hst">  </span>but little time had passed</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere to the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>crowds came up in haste,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who of friends and kinsfolk<span class="hst">  </span>tidings now were seeking.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon a tale he told them<span class="hst">  </span>with which the hearts of all were well-nigh breaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thus spake the Sturmisch Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Your loss I may not hide,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor falsehood will I tell you;<span class="hst">  </span>all in the fight have died.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The young and old together<span class="hst">  </span>at this with fear were stricken.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er was a throng more wretched;<span class="hst">  </span>no other woes could one to theirs e’er liken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Alas! my bitter sorrow!”<span class="hst">  </span>said King Hettel’s wife.</p>
			<p class="t0">“From me my lord is sundered,<span class="hst">  </span>who there laid down his life,</p>
			<p class="t0">The great and mighty Hettel!<span class="hst">  </span>My pride, how is it fallen!</p>
			<p class="t0">Lost are child and husband!<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun I ne’er shall see, from me forever stolen.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then both knights and maidens<span class="hst">  </span>with sharpest woe were torn;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their sorrow knew no healing.<span class="hst">  </span>Loudly the queen forlorn</p>
			<p class="t0">Was heard, throughout the palace,<span class="hst">  </span>for her husband mourning.</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ah, wretched me,” cried Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>“that now to Hartmut’s side the luck is turning!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the brave old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“My lady, end your moan:</p>
			<p class="t0">Home are they coming never,<span class="hst">  </span>but when to men are grown</p>
			<p class="t0">The youths within our kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>sad days will have an ending;</p>
			<p class="t0">To Ludwig and to Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>the like we’ll do, our wrath upon them spending.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then quoth the weeping lady:<span class="hst">  </span>“Alas, that I must live!</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever I am owning<span class="hst">  </span>I would most gladly give</p>
			<p class="t0">Could e’er my wrongs be righted.<span class="hst">  </span>If but this were granted,</p>
			<p class="t0">That I, poor God-forsaken,<span class="hst">  </span>might see Gu-drun again, naught else were wanted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Old Wâ-te spake to Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“Lady, weep no more.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Tis best that we be sending,<span class="hst">  </span>before twelve days are o’er,</p>
			<p class="t0">To gather all your warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>who will help you gladly</p>
			<p class="t0">To plan a raid on the foeman;<span class="hst">  </span>so with the Norman will it yet go badly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “My Lady Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>list to what befell:</p>
			<p class="t0">Erewhile I took from pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>nine ships, and then set sail:</p>
			<p class="t0">These should again be given<span class="hst">  </span>to those we ill have treated;</p>
			<p class="t0">That when new strifes we’re waging,<span class="hst">  </span>a better luck to us may then be meted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The weeping Hilda answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“’Tis best that this be done;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever is it fitting<span class="hst">  </span>that men for misdeeds atone.</p>
			<p class="t0">To steal the goods of pilgrims<span class="hst">  </span>is a sin not lightly shriven:</p>
			<p class="t0">For every mark we’ve taken,<span class="hst">  </span>to them three marks of silver shall be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The ships were brought to the pilgrims,<span class="hst">  </span>as the queen did say;</p>
			<p class="t0">Not one there was among them,<span class="hst">  </span>when they sailed away,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who left a curse behind him.<span class="hst">  </span>For wrongs they found a healing;</p>
			<p class="t0">And for Hilda, Hagen’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>they harbored, when they left, no bitter feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon the morrow early,<span class="hst">  </span>thither to come was seen</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic, the lord of Sealand;<span class="hst">  </span>soon he found the queen</p>
			<p class="t0">Weeping for her husband,<span class="hst">  </span>who in death was lying.</p>
			<p class="t0">She gave the knight a welcome,<span class="hst">  </span>with hands she ever wrung, and deeply sighing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Seeing the lady weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>then, too, to weep began</p>
			<p class="t0">The young and lordly Herwic;<span class="hst">  </span>soon spake that well-born man:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Their lives not all have given,<span class="hst">  </span>who help to you are owing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And who would gladly grant it;<span class="hst">  </span>though many by their death their love were showing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“My arm shall never falter,<span class="hst">  </span>nor heart from care be free,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till Hartmut feels my anger,<span class="hst">  </span>who stole the maid from me,</p>
			<p class="t0">And dared from home to tear her,<span class="hst">  </span>death to many dealing:</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon will I ride to his borders;<span class="hst">  </span>then will I seize and hold his lands and dwelling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His men, though filled with sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>rode towards the town,</p>
			<p class="t0">Flocking to Matelan castle.<span class="hst">  </span>The queen her hope made known</p>
			<p class="t0">That, whatsoe’er might happen,<span class="hst">  </span>their fealty would not weaken;</p>
			<p class="t0">And, though the worst befell them,<span class="hst">  </span>that she by them would never be forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her the men from Friesland<span class="hst">  </span>and those from Sturmland went,</p>
			<p class="t0">And from the Danish kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>were warriors likewise sent;</p>
			<p class="t0">The knights of Morunc also,<span class="hst">  </span>from the land of Waleis riding,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thither came with the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>to where the fair Queen Hilda was abiding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Forthwith there came from Ortland,<span class="hst">  </span>Ortwin, Hilda’s son;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then mourned they, as was fitting,<span class="hst">  </span>his father dead and gone.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon were all the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>aside with their ladies speaking,</p>
			<p class="t0">And talking of the inroad<span class="hst">  </span>the fighters strong one day would thence be making.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“This can never be</p>
			<p class="t0">Till those who now are children<span class="hst">  </span>fully-grown we see,</p>
			<p class="t0">And worthy to be swordsmen.<span class="hst">  </span>Then, their fathers mourning,</p>
			<p class="t0">And of their kinsmen mindful,<span class="hst">  </span>gladly will they with us to war be turning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda then made answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“To wait for this were long;</p>
			<p class="t0">Meanwhile Gu-drun, my daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>held by foemen strong,</p>
			<p class="t0">Must in a far-off kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>be kept in bondage bitter;</p>
			<p class="t0">And I, poor queen and mother,<span class="hst">  </span>shall know no bliss, and my heart will ne’er grow lighter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the Danish Fru-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“The maid we cannot free</p>
			<p class="t0">Until once more your kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>shall full of warriors be.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, for the struggle ready,<span class="hst">  </span>we hence shall ride, unfearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">And so upon our foemen<span class="hst">  </span>shall work the greatest ill with blows unsparing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To this Queen Hilda answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That day may God soon give;</p>
			<p class="t0">But I, unhappy woman,<span class="hst">  </span>a weary life must live.</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoe’er of me is mindful,<span class="hst">  </span>and of Gu-drun, poor maiden,</p>
			<p class="t0">Him will I trust most fully,<span class="hst">  </span>knowing his heart for us with care is laden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They now their leave were taking;<span class="hst">  </span>to them the lady spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“May he be blest and happy<span class="hst">  </span>who thought for me shall take.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Tis right that you, brave warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>to fight for me are ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">Meanwhile for the coming inroad<span class="hst">  </span>do all you can, and therein be you speedy.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wisely then spake Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>the warrior old and good:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Lady, we should be felling<span class="hst">  </span>trees in the western wood.</p>
			<p class="t0">Since we to fight have chosen,<span class="hst">  </span>our hopes upon it staking,</p>
			<p class="t0">The men of every princedom<span class="hst">  </span>should forty well-built ships for us be making.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I too will bid,” quoth Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>“that near the deep sea-flood</p>
			<p class="t0">Twenty ships be builded,<span class="hst">  </span>strong, and firm, and good;</p>
			<p class="t0">And have them fully ready<span class="hst">  </span>—my hest shall well be heeded—</p>
			<p class="t0">To bear my friends and kindred<span class="hst">  </span>to where they for the fight will soon be needed.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Siegfried, lord of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>while their leave they took,</p>
			<p class="t0">With kind and seemly bearing,<span class="hst">  </span>thus to the women spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“You have to tell me only<span class="hst">  </span>when our time to wait is ending;</p>
			<p class="t0">To sail shall I be ready,<span class="hst">  </span>nor need you then for me be further sending.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the sorrowing women,<span class="hst">  </span>before they spread the sail,</p>
			<p class="t0">The friendly guests, now leaving,<span class="hst">  </span>bade a kind farewell.</p>
			<p class="t0">The hearts of knights and maidens<span class="hst">  </span>deep in woe were sinking;</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet warlike deeds they plotted<span class="hst">  </span>of which their Norman foes were never thinking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they at length had ridden<span class="hst">  </span>back again to their land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Sadly they mourned their losses:<span class="hst">  </span>then to the Wulpensand,</p>
			<p class="t0">For the sake of the dead, did Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>bid that food be taken</p>
			<p class="t0">To the priests for them there praying.<span class="hst">  </span>The queen was wise, the dead were not forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There she bade to be builded<span class="hst">  </span>a minster fair and wide;</p>
			<p class="t0">A house for the sick, and a cloister<span class="hst">  </span>built they at its side,</p>
			<p class="t0">Near where the slain were buried.<span class="hst">  </span>In many a land one heareth</p>
			<p class="t0">Its name, and of those there fallen:<span class="hst">  </span>‘The church of Wulpensand’ is the name it beareth.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c20">Tale the Twentieth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HARTMUT WENT HOME TO NORMANDY.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">No further will we tell you<span class="hst">  </span>of how with these it fared,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or how the cloister-brothers<span class="hst">  </span>their life together shared.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now to the tale of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>we ask you all to listen;</p>
			<p class="t0">How he with many maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>high-born and fair, unto his land did hasten.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After the fight was ended,<span class="hst">  </span>as I have told before,</p>
			<p class="t0">For many there was sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>for the bitter wounds they bore:</p>
			<p class="t0">Many who had fallen<span class="hst">  </span>on the stormy field lay dying;</p>
			<p class="t0">Children bereft of fathers<span class="hst">  </span>bewailed them soon with tears they ne’er were drying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With heavy hearts the Normans<span class="hst">  </span>were wafted o’er the flood;</p>
			<p class="t0">Every night and morning<span class="hst">  </span>many a warrior good</p>
			<p class="t0">Felt ashamed and sorry,<span class="hst">  </span>thus from the sands to be driven;</p>
			<p class="t0">So felt the old and the youthful,<span class="hst">  </span>although in all things else they well had thriven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They came to the Norman borders,<span class="hst">  </span>unto King Ludwig’s land.</p>
			<p class="t0">It was a day of gladness<span class="hst">  </span>to all the sailing band,</p>
			<p class="t0">To see at last their homesteads<span class="hst">  </span>and thither to be steering.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said one among them:<span class="hst">  </span>“These are Hartmut’s towns that we are nearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Helped by kindly breezes,<span class="hst">  </span>soon they reached the shore.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the men of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>happy hearts all bore,</p>
			<p class="t0">When to their wives and children<span class="hst">  </span>they again were coming;</p>
			<p class="t0">Long had they been fearing<span class="hst">  </span>that they must die, while they afar were roaming.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the glad King Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>did on his castles look,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus the lordly Norman<span class="hst">  </span>to Gu-drun, the maiden, spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“See you that palace, Lady?<span class="hst">  </span>In bliss you may there be living;</p>
			<p class="t0">If you to us are kindly,<span class="hst">  </span>our richest lands will we to you be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the high-born maiden<span class="hst">  </span>thus made her sorrow known:</p>
			<p class="t0">“To whom should I feel kindly,<span class="hst">  </span>when kindness none have shown?</p>
			<p class="t0">From that, alas! I’m sundered,<span class="hst">  </span>and in my hopes am thwarted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nothing I know but hardship,<span class="hst">  </span>and all my weary days I spend sad-hearted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered her King Ludwig:<span class="hst">  </span>“Throw off this sorry mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">And give your love to Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>a knight both brave and good.</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever we are owning<span class="hst">  </span>to give you we are willing;</p>
			<p class="t0">With one who is so worthy<span class="hst">  </span>blest may you live, and lofty rank be filling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“Why leave me not in peace?</p>
			<p class="t0">Rather than wed with Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>death would I dread far less.</p>
			<p class="t0">That he should be my lover<span class="hst">  </span>by birth he is not fitted;</p>
			<p class="t0">To lose my life were better<span class="hst">  </span>than take his love and as his bride be greeted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When this was heard by Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>filled with wrath was he;</p>
			<p class="t0">Quick by the hair he seized her,<span class="hst">  </span>and flung her into the sea.</p>
			<p class="t0">Straightway the daring Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>his ready help then gave her;</p>
			<p class="t0">He sprang at once to the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>and from the whirling waves his arm did save her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Just as the maid was sinking<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut reached her side;</p>
			<p class="t0">Had not her lover helped her<span class="hst">  </span>drowned were she in the tide.</p>
			<p class="t0">Her yellow locks well grasping,<span class="hst">  </span>then from out the water</p>
			<p class="t0">With his hands he drew her:<span class="hst">  </span>else nought from death had spared Queen Hilda’s daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Back to the ship did Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>bring the maiden fair;—</p>
			<p class="t0">Rough ways to lovely women<span class="hst">  </span>Ludwig did not spare.</p>
			<p class="t0">Dragged from out the water,<span class="hst">  </span>she in her smock was seated;</p>
			<p class="t0">How full was she of sadness!<span class="hst">  </span>Never before had the maiden thus been treated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then all her friends together<span class="hst">  </span>wept for the lovely maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">None could there be happy;<span class="hst">  </span>for what could be more sad</p>
			<p class="t0">Than to see the king’s own daughter<span class="hst">  </span>handled thus so roughly?</p>
			<p class="t0">The thought to them was rising:<span class="hst">  </span>“To us they now will bear themselves more gruffly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the knightly Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Why drown my hoped-for wife,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>dear to me as life?</p>
			<p class="t0">If any but my father<span class="hst">  </span>so foul a wrong had done her,</p>
			<p class="t0">Sore would be my anger,<span class="hst">  </span>and I from him would take both life and honor.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him King Ludwig answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Ever free from shame</p>
			<p class="t0">Have I till age been living,<span class="hst">  </span>and still a worthy name</p>
			<p class="t0">And rank among my fellows<span class="hst">  </span>will hold till life is ending.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bid now Gu-drun, your lady,<span class="hst">  </span>that she no more her scorn on me be spending.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now unto Queen Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>errand-bearers came,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who, in mood most happy,<span class="hst">  </span>bore in Hartmut’s name</p>
			<p class="t0">Words of love and honor,<span class="hst">  </span>as from her son was fitting.</p>
			<p class="t0">He asked a friendly welcome<span class="hst">  </span>for his many knights who on the shore were waiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They bore from him the tidings<span class="hst">  </span>that he across the wave</p>
			<p class="t0">Had brought the Hegeling maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>to whom his love he gave</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere he had looked upon her,<span class="hst">  </span>and for whom he still was pining.</p>
			<p class="t0">When this was heard by Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>a happier day on her was never shining.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said he who told it:<span class="hst">  </span>“Lady, you now should ride</p>
			<p class="t0">To the sea before the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>where yet the maid doth bide,</p>
			<p class="t0">And give her, in her sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>your love and kindly greeting;</p>
			<p class="t0">You and your daughter, Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>should haste to the shore, the homeless maiden meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Likewise, riding with you<span class="hst">  </span>down unto the flood,</p>
			<p class="t0">Should go both maids and women,<span class="hst">  </span>and also warriors good.</p>
			<p class="t0">Her you will find in the harbor<span class="hst">  </span>who from home was riven;</p>
			<p class="t0">Both to the maid and her followers<span class="hst">  </span>a welcome kind by you should now be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Queen Gerlind answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That will I gladly do;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twill make me richly happy<span class="hst">  </span>King Hettel’s child to know,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to find that, with her maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>she has come to tarry.</p>
			<p class="t0">Well I know that Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>will soon be blest, when he the maid shall marry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then she bade that horses,<span class="hst">  </span>with saddle-cloths, be brought.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortrun, the youthful princess,<span class="hst">  </span>was happy in the thought</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon in her father’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>to see Gu-drun, the maiden,</p>
			<p class="t0">If this might truly happen;<span class="hst">  </span>for the speech of all was with her praises laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then out of chests were taken<span class="hst">  </span>of all the clothes the best</p>
			<p class="t0">They knew therein were lying,<span class="hst">  </span>to be worn to meet the guest.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon the knights of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>to don the clothes were bidden;</p>
			<p class="t0">Erelong a throng of followers,<span class="hst">  </span>gaily bedight, from Gerlind’s halls had ridden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon the third day early,<span class="hst">  </span>women as well as men,</p>
			<p class="t0">All who there had gathered<span class="hst">  </span>before Gerlind, their queen,</p>
			<p class="t0">To give the maidens welcome,<span class="hst">  </span>were ready and outfitted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Out of the gates they crowded,<span class="hst">  </span>and on their steeds not long in the court-yard waited.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The Normans now with the women<span class="hst">  </span>had into the harbor come:</p>
			<p class="t0">The booty they unloaded<span class="hst">  </span>that they would carry home.</p>
			<p class="t0">All unto their birthland<span class="hst">  </span>back had come right gladly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun and her band of maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>alone of all, demeaned themselves but sadly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the brave Sir Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>led her forth by the hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">If she had deemed it fitting,<span class="hst">  </span>this she had not deigned;</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet the poor child, in sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>took his love but coldly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ he showed it warmly,<span class="hst">  </span>and worship more had done freely and boldly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With her went sixty maidens<span class="hst">  </span>who over the sea had come:</p>
			<p class="t0">One saw, as he beheld them,<span class="hst">  </span>how that all from their home</p>
			<p class="t0">Came with proudest bearing.<span class="hst">  </span>They erst high rank had taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">In other lands and kingdoms;<span class="hst">  </span>their hearts were heavy now, of bliss forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The sister of young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>between two barons rode;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now to Hilda’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>a welcome warm she showed:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortrun, Ludwig’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>her eyes now wet with weeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">Kissed the homeless maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>while she her fair white hands in her own was keeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the wife of Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>to kiss her, too, was fain,</p>
			<p class="t0">But to the youthful maiden<span class="hst">  </span>the thought was full of pain.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus she spake to Gerlind:<span class="hst">  </span>“Why come you here to meet me?</p>
			<p class="t0">Loath am I to kiss you,<span class="hst">  </span>and neither can I bear that you should greet me.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“’Twas by your own ill-doing<span class="hst">  </span>that I, poor wretched maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">Have known no home nor dwelling;<span class="hst">  </span>heart-sorrow long I’ve had;</p>
			<p class="t0">My lot, alas! is shameful,<span class="hst">  </span>and will, I fear, grow harder.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Ortrun strove to soothe her,<span class="hst">  </span>and did her best that with love Gu-drun should reward her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One by one she greeted<span class="hst">  </span>the maids on every side.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now rose a wondrous shouting;<span class="hst">  </span>men flocked from far and wide:</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the pebbly sea-beach<span class="hst">  </span>stakes for tents were driven;</p>
			<p class="t0">With silken ropes were they fastened;<span class="hst">  </span>to Hartmut and his men was shelter in them given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To bear the goods from the seaside<span class="hst">  </span>the folk were all astir.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, fair maiden, sorrowed,<span class="hst">  </span>and pain it gave to her</p>
			<p class="t0">To see that all around her<span class="hst">  </span>the Normans were so many;</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless it were to Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>she never showed a friendly mood to any.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The maidens on the seashore<span class="hst">  </span>must all the day abide.</p>
			<p class="t0">With tears their eyes were flowing,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever others did;</p>
			<p class="t0">Dry were they but seldom,<span class="hst">  </span>their cheeks were pale with sorrow:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut tried to soothe them,<span class="hst">  </span>but their sadness lasted yet through many a morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To hold Gu-drun in honor<span class="hst">  </span>was Ortrun ever stern,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, e’en if others wronged her,<span class="hst">  </span>with love to her did turn:</p>
			<p class="t0">She in her father’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>strove to make her merry,</p>
			<p class="t0">But, far from friends and kindred,<span class="hst">  </span>often the poor young girl was sad and weary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the Normans home was welcome,<span class="hst">  </span>as indeed was right;</p>
			<p class="t0">They boasted much of the booty,<span class="hst">  </span>both churl as well as knight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Brought from the Hegeling kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>as they home were turning.</p>
			<p class="t0">What welcome glad all gave them<span class="hst">  </span>who ne’er to see them hoped, albeit yearning!</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as Hartmut’s warriors<span class="hst">  </span>from all their toil were free,</p>
			<p class="t0">And they were fully rested<span class="hst">  </span>from off the stormy sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">They quickly left each other,<span class="hst">  </span>for their homes in many places:</p>
			<p class="t0">While some their hands were wringing,<span class="hst">  </span>smiles were seen to brighten others’ faces.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then did Hartmut also<span class="hst">  </span>turn away from the shore,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to a stately palace<span class="hst">  </span>the fair Gu-drun he bore.</p>
			<p class="t0">Henceforth the youthful maiden<span class="hst">  </span>must tarry there far longer</p>
			<p class="t0">Than she to stay was minded,<span class="hst">  </span>and there her woe and pain grew ever stronger.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the high-born maiden<span class="hst">  </span>sat in Hartmut’s hall,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where his men should crown her,<span class="hst">  </span>then he bade them all</p>
			<p class="t0">To be forever faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>and their goodwill to show her;</p>
			<p class="t0">So would she not forget them,<span class="hst">  </span>but would enrich whoe’er should kindness do her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the mother, Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>old King Ludwig’s wife:</p>
			<p class="t0">“When will Gu-drun be ready<span class="hst">  </span>to share young Hartmut’s life,</p>
			<p class="t0">Our youthful prince so noble,<span class="hst">  </span>and in her arms to fold him?</p>
			<p class="t0">Of her his rank is worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>and ne’er will she be sorry for her lord to hold him.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun to this had listened,<span class="hst">  </span>the wretched, homeless maid;</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “My Lady Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>’twould make you sad indeed</p>
			<p class="t0">If you must take in wedlock<span class="hst">  </span>one who the lives had wasted</p>
			<p class="t0">Of many friends and kinsfolk;<span class="hst">  </span>by toil for him your life were ever blasted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This shall no one hinder,”<span class="hst">  </span>to her then said the queen;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Gainsay his will no longer,<span class="hst">  </span>let your love for him be seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">And on my head I pledge you<span class="hst">  </span>that rich shall be your guerdon:</p>
			<p class="t0">If to be a queen you spurn not,<span class="hst">  </span>you of my crown shall bear the happy burden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the sorrowing maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“That will I never wear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all his wealth and greatness<span class="hst">  </span>you the tale may spare.</p>
			<p class="t0">Your son, the knightly Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>my love can ne’er be winning:</p>
			<p class="t0">Unwilling here I linger,<span class="hst">  </span>and hence to go I day by day am pining.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the youthful Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>who of the land was lord,</p>
			<p class="t0">Was angry with the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>when he her answer heard.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “If, then, to wed her<span class="hst">  </span>the lady granteth never,</p>
			<p class="t0">So, also, to the fair one<span class="hst">  </span>shall my goodwill and love be wanting ever.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the wicked Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>to Hartmut said, in turn:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ever the young and thoughtless<span class="hst">  </span>from the wise should learn.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now leave to me this maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>let me for her be caring,</p>
			<p class="t0">And I so well shall teach her<span class="hst">  </span>that she will quickly drop her lofty bearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“That will I grant you gladly,”<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut answering said;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whate’er from this may follow,<span class="hst">  </span>to you I give the maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">To have in your good keeping,<span class="hst">  </span>as suits her rank and honor;</p>
			<p class="t0">The maid is sad and homeless;<span class="hst">  </span>lady, ’tis right that kindly care be shown her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">So Gu-drun, the fair one,<span class="hst">  </span>when Hartmut went that day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Was left unto his mother,<span class="hst">  </span>and given to her sway:</p>
			<p class="t0">But Hilda’s youthful daughter<span class="hst">  </span>Gerlind’s guidance hated;</p>
			<p class="t0">She could not brook her teaching,<span class="hst">  </span>and never her dislike for this abated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>the old she-devil spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“If you will not live happy,<span class="hst">  </span>then sorrow you must take.</p>
			<p class="t0">You have to heat my chamber;<span class="hst">  </span>yourself the fire must kindle;</p>
			<p class="t0">See, there is none to help you,<span class="hst">  </span>nor may you hope your toil will ever dwindle.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high-born maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That I well can do;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever you shall bid me,<span class="hst">  </span>in all must I yield to you,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until the God in heaven<span class="hst">  </span>at last my wrongs has righted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never my mother’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>the fire upon the hearth ere this has lighted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Said Gerlind: “As I’m living,<span class="hst">  </span>to toil must you begin,</p>
			<p class="t0">As never queenly daughter<span class="hst">  </span>to do before was seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">To be so proud and headstrong<span class="hst">  </span>I will make you weary:</p>
			<p class="t0">Before to-morrow darkens,<span class="hst">  </span>your maidens you must leave, and ne’er be merry.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“You hold yourself too highly,<span class="hst">  </span>as I have heard it said;</p>
			<p class="t0">For this shall work most toilsome<span class="hst">  </span>soon upon you be laid.</p>
			<p class="t0">This pride and froward bearing<span class="hst">  </span>must be by you forsaken;</p>
			<p class="t0">Your lofty mood will I lower,<span class="hst">  </span>and all your hopes will very quickly weaken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then went the wicked Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>to court, in anger wild;</p>
			<p class="t0">She said to her son, young Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hettel’s wilful child</p>
			<p class="t0">Scorns both you and your kindred,<span class="hst">  </span>and ever at us is sneering:</p>
			<p class="t0">Would we had never seen her,<span class="hst">  </span>if we such talk from her must now be hearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake unto his mother<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut, the knight so brave:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Pray treat the maiden kindly,<span class="hst">  </span>howe’er she may behave:</p>
			<p class="t0">So, for the care you show her,<span class="hst">  </span>my thanks will you be earning.</p>
			<p class="t0">Greatly have I wronged her;<span class="hst">  </span>it well may be that she my love is spurning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to him old Gerlind:<span class="hst">  </span>“Whate’er by us is done,</p>
			<p class="t0">In mood she is so stubborn<span class="hst">  </span>that she will yield to none.</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless we treat her harshly<span class="hst">  </span>she ne’er, as you would have her,</p>
			<p class="t0">Will come to you in wedlock;<span class="hst">  </span>this must we do, or else to herself must leave her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to her thus answered<span class="hst">  </span>the worthy Norman knight:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Good lady, show her kindness<span class="hst">  </span>henceforth in all men’s sight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now for the love you bear me;<span class="hst">  </span>such care I beg you give her</p>
			<p class="t0">That from her love and friendship<span class="hst">  </span>the king’s fair daughter may not bar me ever.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then his devilish mother,<span class="hst">  </span>with anger brimming o’er,</p>
			<p class="t0">To the throng of Hegeling maidens<span class="hst">  </span>quickly went once more.</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “Make ready, maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>and to your toil betake you,</p>
			<p class="t0">To do what you are bidden;<span class="hst">  </span>the task to each that’s given ne’er forsake you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The maidens then were sundered,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon from each other torn;</p>
			<p class="t0">They saw not one another,<span class="hst">  </span>and long must live forlorn.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who once so worthily<span class="hst">  </span>lofty rank were taking,</p>
			<p class="t0">In winding yarn were busied;<span class="hst">  </span>while they sat at work their hearts were aching.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Some her flax were combing,<span class="hst">  </span>others for her must spin;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ladies of lofty breeding,<span class="hst">  </span>whose pastime it had been</p>
			<p class="t0">On their silken clothing<span class="hst">  </span>to lay, with skill unsparing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gold and gems most costly,<span class="hst">  </span>these for her now heavy toil were bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The first in birth among them<span class="hst">  </span>at the court was kept;</p>
			<p class="t0">Water she must carry<span class="hst">  </span>to the room where Ortrun slept:</p>
			<p class="t0">To wait upon that lady<span class="hst">  </span>the high-born maid was bidden;</p>
			<p class="t0">By name was she called Hergart;<span class="hst">  </span>her lofty birth was nought, she still was chidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Among them was another,<span class="hst">  </span>brought from Galicia’s strand;</p>
			<p class="t0">The griffin her from Portugal<span class="hst">  </span>had borne to a far-off land.</p>
			<p class="t0">She to the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>with Hagen’s child was carried,</p>
			<p class="t0">From over Ireland’s borders;<span class="hst">  </span>now with the maids in the Norman land she tarried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She was a prince’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>who castles owned and lands;</p>
			<p class="t0">The fire must now be lighted<span class="hst">  </span>by her, with fair white hands,</p>
			<p class="t0">While in the room well heated<span class="hst">  </span>Gerlind’s ladies rested.</p>
			<p class="t0">For all the work she was doing<span class="hst">  </span>no thanks on her by them were ever wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now you well may wonder<span class="hst">  </span>to hear her sorry plight.</p>
			<p class="t0">For Gerlind’s lowest wenches<span class="hst">  </span>she drudged both day and night;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever task they set her,<span class="hst">  </span>to do must she be willing.</p>
			<p class="t0">It helped her not with the Normans<span class="hst">  </span>that she at home a lofty rank was filling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The work was mean and shameful<span class="hst">  </span>that they were made to do</p>
			<p class="t0">For seven half years and over,<span class="hst">  </span>—this is all too true,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Until the young Lord Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>when three wars were ended,</p>
			<p class="t0">Had come again to his kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>and found the maids at work, and ill-befriended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To see again his loved one<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut deeply yearned;</p>
			<p class="t0">But when he looked upon her,<span class="hst">  </span>the truth he quickly learned,</p>
			<p class="t0">That she good food and lodging<span class="hst">  </span>of late had seldom tasted:</p>
			<p class="t0">For choosing to live rightly,<span class="hst">  </span>’twas her reward to be with sorrow wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When forth she came to meet him,<span class="hst">  </span>to her young Hartmut said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Gu-drun, most lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>what is the life you have led</p>
			<p class="t0">Since I, with all my warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>my lands and home was leaving?”</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “Such tasks they set me,<span class="hst">  </span>’twas sin for you, and shame to me ’twas giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then outspoke young Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Why has this been done,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gerlind, my dearest mother?<span class="hst">  </span>Your love she should have known;</p>
			<p class="t0">When with you I left her,<span class="hst">  </span>her lot you should have brightened,</p>
			<p class="t0">And all her heavy sorrows<span class="hst">  </span>you should for her within my land have lightened.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His wolfish mother answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“How could I better teach</p>
			<p class="t0">King Hettel’s ill-bred daughter?<span class="hst">  </span>’Twas bootless to beseech,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor could I ever bend her,<span class="hst">  </span>to make her leave her jeering:</p>
			<p class="t0">She scorned both you and your father<span class="hst">  </span>and kindred, too: to this should you give hearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then again spake Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Much wrong we’ve done the maid.</p>
			<p class="t0">Slain by us, her kindred<span class="hst">  </span>and many knights lie dead;</p>
			<p class="t0">While from the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>her father we have taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">Slain by my father, Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>and now with thoughtless words her woes we waken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered him his mother:<span class="hst">  </span>“My son, ’tis truth I say;</p>
			<p class="t0">If we Gu-drun, proud maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>for thirty years should pray,</p>
			<p class="t0">If she with brooms were stricken,<span class="hst">  </span>or with rods were beaten,</p>
			<p class="t0">Your wife we ne’er could make her;<span class="hst">  </span>hopeless it is the wayward maid to threaten.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She farther said to Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“However, since you bid,</p>
			<p class="t0">I’ll gladly treat her better.”<span class="hst">  </span>But still her mind she hid,</p>
			<p class="t0">And Hartmut never knew it;<span class="hst">  </span>erelong Gu-drun would find her</p>
			<p class="t0">Harsher yet than ever;<span class="hst">  </span>and now the maiden’s wrongs could no one hinder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then went again old Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>to where Gu-drun then sat,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said to the Hegeling maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>in her wrath and hate:</p>
			<p class="t0">“’Twere best you now bethink you,<span class="hst">  </span>or else, my fair young maiden,</p>
			<p class="t0">You with your flowing tresses<span class="hst">  </span>must wipe the stools and seats, with dust thick laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Then the room I sleep in,<span class="hst">  </span>mark what now I say,</p>
			<p class="t0">You, to do my bidding,<span class="hst">  </span>must sweep three times a day;</p>
			<p class="t0">You carefully must warm it,<span class="hst">  </span>and keep the fire well burning.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Said she: “That do I gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>rather than take a lover I am spurning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whatever she was bidden<span class="hst">  </span>the willing maiden did;</p>
			<p class="t0">No work of hers she slighted,<span class="hst">  </span>nor should for aught be chid.</p>
			<p class="t0">For seven years, full-numbered,<span class="hst">  </span>in a land far over the water,</p>
			<p class="t0">The maid was toiling wearily,<span class="hst">  </span>and none did hold her as a kingly daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The years had long been running,<span class="hst">  </span>and the ninth was coming on,</p>
			<p class="t0">When Hartmut to bethink him<span class="hst">  </span>wisely had begun,</p>
			<p class="t0">That indeed ’twas shameful<span class="hst">  </span>that he no crown was wearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">And for himself and his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>’twas right the name of king he now were bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After heavy fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut, with his men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bearing the prize of bravery,<span class="hst">  </span>riding home was seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">He hoped the love of the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>would now to him be granted;</p>
			<p class="t0">For, more than any other,<span class="hst">  </span>he the fair Gu-drun for his true love wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he reached his homestead,<span class="hst">  </span>he bade them bring the maid.</p>
			<p class="t0">His evil mother, Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>allowed her to be clad</p>
			<p class="t0">In meanest clothing only:<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun but little heeded</p>
			<p class="t0">The youthful Hartmut’s wooing;<span class="hst">  </span>steadfast and true, no love from him she needed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him his friends then whispered,<span class="hst">  </span>that, whether glad or no</p>
			<p class="t0">For this might be his mother,<span class="hst">  </span>he never should forego</p>
			<p class="t0">To bend the maid to his wishes;<span class="hst">  </span>and must his care be giving</p>
			<p class="t0">That so he might with the lady<span class="hst">  </span>for many a happy day in love be living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the ladies’ room he hastened,<span class="hst">  </span>when thus his kinsmen spoke,</p>
			<p class="t0">And there he found the maiden;<span class="hst">  </span>her by the hand he took,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said to her: “Fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>love me now, I pray you,</p>
			<p class="t0">And sit as queen beside me;<span class="hst">  </span>my knights and men shall worship ever pay you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the lovely maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“For this I have no mind;</p>
			<p class="t0">For while the fiendish Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>to me is so unkind,</p>
			<p class="t0">The love of knights, tho’ worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>I can long for never.</p>
			<p class="t0">To her and all her kindred<span class="hst">  </span>henceforth am I a bitter foe forever.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Sorry am I,” said Hartmut;<span class="hst">  </span>“to you will I make good</p>
			<p class="t0">The hate my mother Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>to you so harshly showed;</p>
			<p class="t0">As for both of us is worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>your wrongs shall now be righted.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The high-born maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“I trust you not; your word need ne’er be plighted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to her young Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>the lord of the Norman land:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Gu-drun, most lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>you well must understand</p>
			<p class="t0">Mine are these lands and castles:<span class="hst">  </span>to none may you betake you;</p>
			<p class="t0">Who is there here would hang me<span class="hst">  </span>if, ’gainst your will, I now my own should make you?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said King Hettel’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“That were a deed of shame:</p>
			<p class="t0">Of aught so wrong and hateful<span class="hst">  </span>never did I dream.</p>
			<p class="t0">It would be said by princes,<span class="hst">  </span>should they the tale be hearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">That one of the kin of Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>in Hartmut’s land a harlot’s name is bearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then did Hartmut answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“What care I what they say?</p>
			<p class="t0">If only you, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>do not say me nay,</p>
			<p class="t0">A king my men shall see me,<span class="hst">  </span>and you my seat be sharing.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the maid to Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“That I should love you be you never fearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Well you know, Sir Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>how with me it stands;</p>
			<p class="t0">And all the wrong and sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>I met with at your hands,</p>
			<p class="t0">When far from home you carried<span class="hst">  </span>me whom you had stolen,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, wounded by your warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>my father’s men erewhile in death had fallen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Well known to you ’tis also,<span class="hst">  </span>—for this I mourn again,—</p>
			<p class="t0">How my father, Hettel,<span class="hst">  </span>was by your father slain.</p>
			<p class="t0">Were I knight, and not a woman,<span class="hst">  </span>he durst not come before me</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless his weapons wearing.<span class="hst">  </span>Why wed the man who from my kindred tore me?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For many years now bygone,<span class="hst">  </span>it ever was the way,</p>
			<p class="t0">No man should take a woman,<span class="hst">  </span>and have her in his sway,</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless they both were willing.<span class="hst">  </span>Much praise for this is owing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the homeless maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>her father’s loss still mourned, with tears o’erflowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake to her in anger<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut, the youthful knight:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whatever may befall you,<span class="hst">  </span>I reck not for your plight;</p>
			<p class="t0">Since now you are not willing<span class="hst">  </span>to wear the crown beside me,</p>
			<p class="t0">You’ll have what you are seeking,<span class="hst">  </span>your meed you’ll daily earn, nor need you chide me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“That will I earn most gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>as I have done before,</p>
			<p class="t0">Though for the men of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>the hardest toil I bore,</p>
			<p class="t0">And for Queen Gerlind’s women.<span class="hst">  </span>If God my wrongs forgetteth,</p>
			<p class="t0">To bear them I am willing;<span class="hst">  </span>but heavy is the woe that me besetteth.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Still they sought to soothe her:<span class="hst">  </span>first to the court they sent</p>
			<p class="t0">Young Ortrun, Hartmut’s sister,<span class="hst">  </span>whose looks all kindness meant;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas hoped that she and her maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>now by friendly dealing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Would bring Gu-drun, poor lone one,<span class="hst">  </span>to bear towards them all a better feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to his sister Ortrun<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut freely spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Wealth I will give you, sister,<span class="hst">  </span>if kindly, for my sake,</p>
			<p class="t0">To me you will be helpful,<span class="hst">  </span>and bring Gu-drun, fair lady,</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon to forget her sorrows;<span class="hst">  </span>nor o’er her woes to brood be ever ready.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the youthful Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>the Norman maiden fair:</p>
			<p class="t0">“To help both her and her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>shall ever be my care,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till they forget their sorrows:<span class="hst">  </span>I bow my head before her,</p>
			<p class="t0">And I and mine will hold her<span class="hst">  </span>even as our kin, and watchful love spread o’er her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun now said to Ortrun:<span class="hst">  </span>“My hearty thanks you win,</p>
			<p class="t0">That you, with kindly wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>would see me sit as queen,</p>
			<p class="t0">By the side of Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>while with pride I’m gladdened:</p>
			<p class="t0">For this my trust I give you,<span class="hst">  </span>but homeless, none the less, my days are saddened.”</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c21">Tale the Twenty-First.<br/><span class="small">HOW GUDRUN MUST WASH CLOTHES ON THE BEACH.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to Gu-drun they offered<span class="hst">  </span>castles strong and lands:</p>
			<p class="t0">Of these would she have nothing.<span class="hst">  </span>So, upon the sands,</p>
			<p class="t0">She must wash their clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>from early morn till even.</p>
			<p class="t0">Great ill this wrought for Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>when he with Herwic in the fight had striven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First, Gu-drun was bidden<span class="hst">  </span>to leave her seat, that soon</p>
			<p class="t0">She, the high-born maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>should go with fair Ortrun;</p>
			<p class="t0">They bade that she be merry,<span class="hst">  </span>and wine with her be drinking.</p>
			<p class="t0">The homeless wanderer answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To make me queen you never need be thinking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Well you wot, Lord Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>whate’er your wish may be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Betrothed am I to another,<span class="hst">  </span>and am no longer free.</p>
			<p class="t0">That I one day shall wed him<span class="hst">  </span>has with an oath been plighted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Until by death he’s taken<span class="hst">  </span>I will not wed with any man e’er knighted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the lordly Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“You only waste your breath;</p>
			<p class="t0">By nought shall we be sundered<span class="hst">  </span>unless it shall be death.</p>
			<p class="t0">In friendship with my sister<span class="hst">  </span>you should now be living;</p>
			<p class="t0">Your hardships she will lighten,<span class="hst">  </span>and will, I know, her love to you be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Fain to think was Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>that her unyielding mood</p>
			<p class="t0">Might now by this be softened;<span class="hst">  </span>he hoped, whatever good</p>
			<p class="t0">Should e’er befall his sister,<span class="hst">  </span>the maiden would be sharing:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus for both he trusted,<span class="hst">  </span>that a happy life erelong would them be cheering.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun soon greeted kindly<span class="hst">  </span>many a friend and maid.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortrun sat beside her;<span class="hst">  </span>her hue grew rosy-red</p>
			<p class="t0">With eating and with drinking,<span class="hst">  </span>ere many days were ended.</p>
			<p class="t0">Enough was always ready:<span class="hst">  </span>still the poor girl her mood ne’er wisely mended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">If Hartmut thought to greet her,<span class="hst">  </span>and spoke in friendly mood,</p>
			<p class="t0">How little did it cheer her!<span class="hst">  </span>She o’er her woes did brood,</p>
			<p class="t0">That she and all her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>in a far-off land were bearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon, against young Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>of harsh and angry words she was not sparing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">So long a time this lasted,<span class="hst">  </span>the king at length was wroth;</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Gu-drun, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>as good am I in birth</p>
			<p class="t0">As is the young King Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>who now you think is fitter</p>
			<p class="t0">Than I to be your lover:<span class="hst">  </span>too much you jeer at me, with words most bitter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If you would leave your sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>for both of us ’twere gain.</p>
			<p class="t0">It wounds me out of measure<span class="hst">  </span>when any gives you pain,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or seeks your heart to burden,<span class="hst">  </span>or in your wish to cross you:</p>
			<p class="t0">Though now you are unfriendly,<span class="hst">  </span>to be my queen I yet would gladly choose you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then young Hartmut left her,<span class="hst">  </span>and straight his men he sought.</p>
			<p class="t0">He bade them to be watchful<span class="hst">  </span>of ills that threatened aught,</p>
			<p class="t0">And well to guard his kingdom;<span class="hst">  </span>for he the while bethought him,</p>
			<p class="t0">So sorely was he hated,<span class="hst">  </span>’twas much to fear some harm would yet be wrought him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The cross and wicked Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>for her hard tasks did set;</p>
			<p class="t0">She on a seat but seldom<span class="hst">  </span>any rest did get.</p>
			<p class="t0">Erst ’mong princes’ daughters<span class="hst">  </span>men were wont to greet her,</p>
			<p class="t0">As for her was rightful;<span class="hst">  </span>now with the scorned and lowly they must meet her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her, in mood unfriendly,<span class="hst">  </span>the old she-wolf then spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now Queen Hilda’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>I a drudge will make;</p>
			<p class="t0">Although her evil feelings<span class="hst">  </span>seem so strong and steady,</p>
			<p class="t0">We yet shall see her toiling<span class="hst">  </span>as ne’er before to do has she been ready.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the high-born maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“To work with all my might,</p>
			<p class="t0">With hand and heart, I’m willing;<span class="hst">  </span>in this, both day and night,</p>
			<p class="t0">Will I be always busy,<span class="hst">  </span>and every hour be striving;</p>
			<p class="t0">Since ill-luck begrudges<span class="hst">  </span>that I among my friends should now be living.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The wicked Gerlind answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now daily to the beach</p>
			<p class="t0">You my clothes must carry,<span class="hst">  </span>there on the sands to bleach.</p>
			<p class="t0">You must for me and my maidens<span class="hst">  </span>be washing and be drying;</p>
			<p class="t0">And that no one find you idle,<span class="hst">  </span>your work with care you ever must be plying.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the high-born maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Wife of a mighty king,</p>
			<p class="t0">If they will only teach me<span class="hst">  </span>the way to wash and wring,</p>
			<p class="t0">And how to cleanse your clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>to do it I am willing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bliss no more I look for;<span class="hst">  </span>still greater woe my heart must yet be filling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Bid them now to teach me,<span class="hst">  </span>and I will gladly learn;</p>
			<p class="t0">So high I do not hold me<span class="hst">  </span>that I the task should spurn.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus shall I be earning<span class="hst">  </span>the food I here am eating;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nought I say against it.”<span class="hst">  </span>The poor Gu-drun her lot was wisely meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then by a washerwoman<span class="hst">  </span>clothes to the sands were brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">And how to wash and dry them<span class="hst">  </span>the maiden now was taught.</p>
			<p class="t0">Much at first she sorrowed,<span class="hst">  </span>and by the work was flurried,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet was she spared by no one.<span class="hst">  </span>So was the fair Gu-drun by Gerlind worried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before King Ludwig’s castle,<span class="hst">  </span>she gained a skilful hand;</p>
			<p class="t0">For knights who there were dwelling<span class="hst">  </span>within the Norman land,</p>
			<p class="t0">None could be more helpful,<span class="hst">  </span>their clothing better washing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Loudly mourned her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>to see her toiling where the waves were dashing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">One there was among them<span class="hst">  </span>who was also a great king’s child;</p>
			<p class="t0">The wailing of the others<span class="hst">  </span>was to hers a whisper mild.</p>
			<p class="t0">This work so mean and lowly<span class="hst">  </span>went to their hearts too nearly,</p>
			<p class="t0">As they saw the high-born lady<span class="hst">  </span>drudging on the shore, both late and early.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then with love true-hearted<span class="hst">  </span>Hildeburg made moan:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Well we all must rue it—<span class="hst">  </span>to God may this be known—</p>
			<p class="t0">Who in this Norman kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>erst with Gu-drun were landing;</p>
			<p class="t0">No rest ought we to hope for<span class="hst">  </span>while on the sea-beach washing she is standing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">This was heard by Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>who in anger spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“If on the toils of your lady<span class="hst">  </span>with such ill-will you look,</p>
			<p class="t0">The work shall you be doing,<span class="hst">  </span>and her place be filling.”</p>
			<p class="t0">“That would I do right gladly,”<span class="hst">  </span>said Hildeburg, “if only you were willing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“For the love of God Almighty,<span class="hst">  </span>Gerlind, my lady queen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Let not this great king’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>toiling alone be seen:</p>
			<p class="t0">A crown, too, wore my father,<span class="hst">  </span>yet work would I be doing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Let me with her stand washing,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever good or ill we may be knowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“It fills my heart with sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>I feel her woes my own.</p>
			<p class="t0">Once the greatest honor<span class="hst">  </span>to her by God was shown:</p>
			<p class="t0">Her forefathers and kindred<span class="hst">  </span>were kings, and none were higher;</p>
			<p class="t0">Though now her work is lowly,<span class="hst">  </span>to toil with the maiden I shall never tire.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the wicked Gerlind:<span class="hst">  </span>“This oft will bring you pain;</p>
			<p class="t0">However hard the winter,<span class="hst">  </span>still in snow and rain</p>
			<p class="t0">My clothes must you be washing,<span class="hst">  </span>altho’ cold winds are blowing;</p>
			<p class="t0">So will you be wishing<span class="hst">  </span>that you the warmth of heated rooms were knowing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Unwillingly she waited<span class="hst">  </span>until the night drew near;</p>
			<p class="t0">From this Gu-drun the high-born<span class="hst">  </span>gained at last some cheer.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then into her bedroom<span class="hst">  </span>went Hildeburg in sorrow;</p>
			<p class="t0">There they wept together<span class="hst">  </span>for the work that they must do upon the morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the Lady Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>said to her in tears:</p>
			<p class="t0">“The woes that you are bearing<span class="hst">  </span>my heart with you now shares;</p>
			<p class="t0">I begged the old she-devil<span class="hst">  </span>no more alone to leave you</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the sea-sands washing;<span class="hst">  </span>with you I’ll bear the burden, and my help will give you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The homeless maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“May Christ your love reward,</p>
			<p class="t0">That you with so much sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>of all my woes have heard.</p>
			<p class="t0">If we may wash together,<span class="hst">  </span>the days will be the brighter,</p>
			<p class="t0">And time will seem far shorter,<span class="hst">  </span>and on our hearts the shame will weigh the lighter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as her wish was granted,<span class="hst">  </span>down to the sandy shore</p>
			<p class="t0">The clothing then she carried,<span class="hst">  </span>gladness to know no more.</p>
			<p class="t0">There must they wash in sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever was the weather;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er was done by others,<span class="hst">  </span>yet still these two must wash and toil together.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When her throng of handmaidens<span class="hst">  </span>had time from work to spare,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bitter was their weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>to see her standing there</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the sea-sands washing.<span class="hst">  </span>Loud were their moans and many,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor did their sorrow lessen;<span class="hst">  </span>greater woe was never known by any.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Long the toiling lasted,—<span class="hst">  </span>that is true enough;</p>
			<p class="t0">There must they be working<span class="hst">  </span>full five years and a half.</p>
			<p class="t0">Clothes for Hartmut’s followers<span class="hst">  </span>they must wash and whiten:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er were maidens sadder;<span class="hst">  </span>their toils before the castle nought could lighten.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c22">Tale the Twenty-Second.<br/><span class="small">HOW HILDA MADE WAR TO BRING BACK HER DAUGHTER.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">We now will speak no longer<span class="hst">  </span>of the toil the maidens bore</p>
			<p class="t0">For knights as well as ladies.<span class="hst">  </span>Queen Hilda evermore</p>
			<p class="t0">Her thoughts to this had given<span class="hst">  </span>how to win back her daughter,</p>
			<p class="t0">Out of the Norman kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>whither from home the daring Hartmut brought her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First were workmen bidden,<span class="hst">  </span>near to the deep sea-flood,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of ships to build her seven,<span class="hst">  </span>strong, well made, and good;</p>
			<p class="t0">With two-and-twenty barges,<span class="hst">  </span>broad, with both ends rounded.</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er for them was needed<span class="hst">  </span>was quickly brought, and everything abounded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Forty galleys also<span class="hst">  </span>lay upon the sea;</p>
			<p class="t0">On these her eyes were feeding.<span class="hst">  </span>Longing great had she</p>
			<p class="t0">To see the throng of fighters<span class="hst">  </span>who should soon be sailing.</p>
			<p class="t0">She their food made ready;<span class="hst">  </span>for this the knights her praise were loudly telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The time was drawing nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>when now to cross the sea</p>
			<p class="t0">No more should they be waiting,<span class="hst">  </span>who wished the maids to free,</p>
			<p class="t0">That in a far-off kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>in hardest toil were living.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now Hilda sent for her liegemen;<span class="hst">  </span>to those who called them clothes she first was giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The day that she had chosen<span class="hst">  </span>was at the Christmas-tide,</p>
			<p class="t0">When they must seek the foemen<span class="hst">  </span>by whom King Hettel died.</p>
			<p class="t0">Forthwith to friends and kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>Hilda gave her bidding,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they to bring her daughter<span class="hst">  </span>back from the Norman land must then be speeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Trusty men were bidden<span class="hst">  </span>by Hilda first to go</p>
			<p class="t0">To Herwic and his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>that one and all should know</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the inroad on the Normans<span class="hst">  </span>that she had sworn and plotted.</p>
			<p class="t0">To many Hegeling children<span class="hst">  </span>this erelong an orphan’s life allotted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The men sent out by Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>to Herwic rode in haste:</p>
			<p class="t0">For what they then were coming<span class="hst">  </span>the king full quickly guessed;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then went he forth to meet them,<span class="hst">  </span>soon as he saw them nearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gladly them he greeted,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon from them Queen Hilda’s wish was hearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Well you know, Lord Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>our woe and plight forlorn,</p>
			<p class="t0">And how the Hegeling warriors<span class="hst">  </span>to help the queen have sworn.</p>
			<p class="t0">Yourself Queen Hilda trusteth<span class="hst">  </span>more than any other;</p>
			<p class="t0">To none Gu-drun is dearer,—<span class="hst">  </span>the homeless maid, long sundered from her mother.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The well-born knight thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“I know in truth too well</p>
			<p class="t0">How Hartmut had the boldness<span class="hst">  </span>my fair betrothed to steal,</p>
			<p class="t0">Because his love she slighted,<span class="hst">  </span>and hearkened to my wooing;</p>
			<p class="t0">For this Gu-drun, my lady,<span class="hst">  </span>her father lost, and still her lot is ruing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“My pledge and hearty greeting<span class="hst">  </span>bear to your lady good;</p>
			<p class="t0">No more the Norman Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>by me shall be allowed</p>
			<p class="t0">To hold so long in bondage<span class="hst">  </span>my own betrothéd maiden:</p>
			<p class="t0">For me, of all, ’tis fittest<span class="hst">  </span>to bring the lady home, our lives to gladden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“To Hilda and her kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>this answer you may say:</p>
			<p class="t0">When Christmas time is over,<span class="hst">  </span>on the sixth-and-twentieth day,</p>
			<p class="t0">I will ride to the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>three thousand fighters taking.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the men of Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>waited no more, but home their way were making.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now Herwic made him ready,<span class="hst">  </span>and to the strife gave thought,</p>
			<p class="t0">With many faithful liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>who oft had bravely fought.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who to go were willing<span class="hst">  </span>he for war outfitted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Though wintry was the weather,<span class="hst">  </span>they to take the field no longer waited.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of help the widowed Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>sorely felt the need:</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon to her friends in Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>she sent her men with speed,</p>
			<p class="t0">To tell the knights and warriors<span class="hst">  </span>no more at home to tarry;</p>
			<p class="t0">For they to the Norman kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>must ride, to free Gu-drun from bondage dreary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They bore to the youthful Horant<span class="hst">  </span>this errand from the queen:</p>
			<p class="t0">That he and all his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>were to her lord of kin,</p>
			<p class="t0">And the sorrows of her daughter<span class="hst">  </span>should by them be heeded;</p>
			<p class="t0">For death to her were better<span class="hst">  </span>than ever that her child to Hartmut should be wedded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then sent the knight this answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“Unto Queen Hilda say,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Though yet ’twill cost to women<span class="hst">  </span>many a bitter day,</p>
			<p class="t0">I still, with all my followers,<span class="hst">  </span>will help be gladly giving;</p>
			<p class="t0">For this will be heard the weeping<span class="hst">  </span>of many a mother’s child, in the land now living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I bid you now, moreover,<span class="hst">  </span>to say unto the queen,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere many days are ended,<span class="hst">  </span>in her land will I be seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Tell her that my wishes<span class="hst">  </span>all to war are bending,</p>
			<p class="t0">And soon ten thousand warriors<span class="hst">  </span>from out the Danish land will I be sending.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The men sent there by Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>of Horant took their leave:</p>
			<p class="t0">They sped to the Waalisch marches,<span class="hst">  </span>and found Morunc the brave</p>
			<p class="t0">With all his men about him,<span class="hst">  </span>a margrave rich and daring.</p>
			<p class="t0">He gladly saw them coming,<span class="hst">  </span>and of a loving welcome was not sparing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Irold:<span class="hst">  </span>“Since now by me ’tis known</p>
			<p class="t0">That into the Hegeling kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>before seven weeks are gone,</p>
			<p class="t0">I with all my followers<span class="hst">  </span>am bidden to be riding,</p>
			<p class="t0">For this will I be ready,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever luck be there for us betiding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The news was spread by Morunc,<span class="hst">  </span>within the Holstein land,</p>
			<p class="t0">That Hilda now was sending<span class="hst">  </span>for all her friends at hand;</p>
			<p class="t0">He said that all good warriors<span class="hst">  </span>must the field be taking.</p>
			<p class="t0">To the Danish knight, brave Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>they also gave the word, his help bespeaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The worthy knight, then answering,<span class="hst">  </span>his ready will did show:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Back to her home will we bring her.<span class="hst">  </span>Thirteen years ago,</p>
			<p class="t0">We swore the land of the Normans<span class="hst">  </span>should with war be wasted;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas then the friends of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>stole the maid Gu-drun, and homeward hasted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, the knight from Sturmland,<span class="hst">  </span>to this at once gave thought,</p>
			<p class="t0">How he might also help her.<span class="hst">  </span>Altho’ he yet knew nought</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the word that Hilda sent him,<span class="hst">  </span>yet he at once bestirred him;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of his knights a goodly number<span class="hst">  </span>then in haste he called, who gladly heard him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All of them were busy<span class="hst">  </span>with care for the coming war;</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te the old from Sturmland<span class="hst">  </span>brought from near and far</p>
			<p class="t0">Full a thousand kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>for the fight well fitted;</p>
			<p class="t0">With these he hoped that Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>would soon be overcome and be outwitted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The sad and homeless women<span class="hst">  </span>in toil and pain were kept</p>
			<p class="t0">By the cross and evil Gerlind:<span class="hst">  </span>but fewer wrongs were heaped</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the Lady Hergart;<span class="hst">  </span>(this name to her was given:)</p>
			<p class="t0">She loved the king’s high cup-bearer,<span class="hst">  </span>and greatly hoped to be a princess even.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For this fair Hilda’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>often sorely wept;</p>
			<p class="t0">And Hergart, too, yet later<span class="hst">  </span>woe and sorrow reaped,</p>
			<p class="t0">Because she ne’er with others<span class="hst">  </span>would their toils be sharing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er to her might happen,<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun for all her ills was little caring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of the Hegelings none were idle,<span class="hst">  </span>as you before have heard:</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ many for all their toiling<span class="hst">  </span>would find but scant reward,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet all within the kingdom their<span class="hst">  </span>ready help were lending.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the knights were thinking<span class="hst">  </span>for the brother of Gu-drun ’twere best they should be sending.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Riders then went swiftly<span class="hst">  </span>into the land of the North,</p>
			<p class="t0">And found in an open meadow<span class="hst">  </span>the youth of kingly birth,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where by the edge of a river<span class="hst">  </span>many birds were flocking:</p>
			<p class="t0">There with his trusty falconer<span class="hst">  </span>he showed his skill, and spent his time in hawking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As soon as, riding quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>these by him were seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Those men now coming<span class="hst">  </span>are sent to us by the queen;</p>
			<p class="t0">They come to give her bidding,<span class="hst">  </span>proudly hither hasting;</p>
			<p class="t0">My mother thinketh wrongly<span class="hst">  </span>that we the war forget, and time are wasting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He set his hawk a-flying,<span class="hst">  </span>and thence at once he rode.</p>
			<p class="t0">Very soon thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>darkened was his mood;</p>
			<p class="t0">For when the men he greeted,<span class="hst">  </span>and they their tale were telling,</p>
			<p class="t0">He learned that the queen, his mother,<span class="hst">  </span>ever in tears her loss was aye bewailing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She to the youthful warrior<span class="hst">  </span>sent her greeting kind:</p>
			<p class="t0">In her wretched lot, she asked him<span class="hst">  </span>what might be his mind;</p>
			<p class="t0">And asked how many followers<span class="hst">  </span>he could to the war be leading;</p>
			<p class="t0">For from the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>they all to the Norman land must soon be speeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Ortwin sent this answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“Me dost thou rightly bid;</p>
			<p class="t0">I from hence will hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>and bring from far and wide</p>
			<p class="t0">Twenty thousand fighters,—<span class="hst">  </span>men both brave and daring;</p>
			<p class="t0">These my steps will follow<span class="hst">  </span>even to death, their lives and homes forswearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now from every border<span class="hst">  </span>many warriors went</p>
			<p class="t0">Riding to Hilda’s kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>for whom the queen had sent;</p>
			<p class="t0">They vied with one another,<span class="hst">  </span>to win her praises striving.</p>
			<p class="t0">Not less than sixty thousand<span class="hst">  </span>together came, their help for Hilda giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On the river Waal Sir Morunc<span class="hst">  </span>had upon the wave</p>
			<p class="t0">Of broad-built ships full sixty,<span class="hst">  </span>strong to bear the brave</p>
			<p class="t0">Who with the Hegelings sailing<span class="hst">  </span>would o’er the sea be carried,</p>
			<p class="t0">To free Gu-drun, the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>who sadly now among the Normans tarried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">From out the Northland also<span class="hst">  </span>finest ships were brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">With horses and with clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>as good as could be sought:</p>
			<p class="t0">Decked were all the helmets,<span class="hst">  </span>the weapons glittered brightly,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ready for the onset<span class="hst">  </span>bravely they came, in armor fair and knightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now by their shields men reckoned<span class="hst">  </span>how many there might be</p>
			<p class="t0">Who to the Norman kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>would go the maid to free,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to the great Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>their help to give were ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">They numbered seventy thousand;<span class="hst">  </span>gifts to all were given by the queenly lady.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On all who there were gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>or to court who later came,</p>
			<p class="t0">The queen, though ever mournful,<span class="hst">  </span>yet let her kindness beam:</p>
			<p class="t0">She gave them hearty welcome,<span class="hst">  </span>and every one she greeted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Wondrous was the clothing<span class="hst">  </span>that to the chosen knights Queen Hilda meted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The many ships of Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>were stored with all things well,</p>
			<p class="t0">And early on the morrow<span class="hst">  </span>were ready thence to sail;</p>
			<p class="t0">Seemly was the outfit<span class="hst">  </span>for her worthy guests who waited:</p>
			<p class="t0">They chose not to be going,<span class="hst">  </span>while aught they lacked to meet the foeman hated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They put on board the weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>as was the queen’s behest,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with them many helmets<span class="hst">  </span>of beaten steel the best.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hauberks white were given,<span class="hst">  </span>besides the ones in wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">For warriors full five hundred;<span class="hst">  </span>these she bade them take, to war now faring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Their anchor-ropes well twisted<span class="hst">  </span>of strongest silk were made:</p>
			<p class="t0">Their sails both rich and showy<span class="hst">  </span>to the winds were spread;</p>
			<p class="t0">These to the shores of the Norman<span class="hst">  </span>the Hegelings would carry,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who back to Lady Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>would gladly bring Gu-drun, of waiting weary.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The anchors for the sailors<span class="hst">  </span>were not of iron made,</p>
			<p class="t0">But of bell-metal moulded;<span class="hst">  </span>(so have we heard it said:)</p>
			<p class="t0">They with Spanish brasses<span class="hst">  </span>all were bound and strengthened,</p>
			<p class="t0">That loadstones should not hold them,<span class="hst">  </span>and so the sailors’ way by this be lengthened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To Wâ-te and his followers<span class="hst">  </span>the Lady Hilda gave</p>
			<p class="t0">Many clasps and arm-bands.<span class="hst">  </span>This roused the strong and brave</p>
			<p class="t0">To meet their death from foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>for the Hegelings fighting,</p>
			<p class="t0">When they from Hartmut’s castle<span class="hst">  </span>strove to wrest the maid, in bondage sitting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Freely then and earnestly<span class="hst">  </span>Queen Hilda spoke her thought</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the men from Daneland:<span class="hst">  </span>“When you have bravely fought</p>
			<p class="t0">On the stormy field of warfare,<span class="hst">  </span>I will reward you fitly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Still my banner follow;<span class="hst">  </span>that will show the way, and lead you rightly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They asked of her, who held it;<span class="hst">  </span>to this then answered she:</p>
			<p class="t0">“He bears the name of Horant;<span class="hst">  </span>a Danish lord is he.</p>
			<p class="t0">His mother, Hettel’s sister,<span class="hst">  </span>she it was who bore him;</p>
			<p class="t0">Let him by you be trusted;<span class="hst">  </span>forsake him not in fight with foes before him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Never, my hardy warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>must you forget my son,</p>
			<p class="t0">Young Ortwin, dear-belovéd,<span class="hst">  </span>to manhood nearly grown.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of life the youth has numbered<span class="hst">  </span>twenty years already;</p>
			<p class="t0">If any risk should threaten,<span class="hst">  </span>to guard him well then let your help be speedy.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To this they pledged them gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and all together said,</p>
			<p class="t0">So long as they were with him<span class="hst">  </span>nought had he to dread;</p>
			<p class="t0">If he their lead would follow,<span class="hst">  </span>those from whom he parted</p>
			<p class="t0">Again unharmed would see him.<span class="hst">  </span>At this young Ortwin showed himself light-hearted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon the ships were laden<span class="hst">  </span>with goods of every kind,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now to tell his wonder<span class="hst">  </span>none fit words could find.</p>
			<p class="t0">They asked good Hilda’s blessing<span class="hst">  </span>on the work now undertaken;</p>
			<p class="t0">The queen then begged of Heaven<span class="hst">  </span>that they by Christ should never be forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Many youths went with them<span class="hst">  </span>whose fathers erst were slain;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now bereft, these brave ones<span class="hst">  </span>to right their wrongs were fain.</p>
			<p class="t0">The women of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>were mourning all and weeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">Beseeching God in Heaven<span class="hst">  </span>to bring them back their sons in his holy keeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But all this pain and sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>the warriors might not bear;</p>
			<p class="t0">They sternly bade the women<span class="hst">  </span>their bitter wails to spare;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then on their way they started<span class="hst">  </span>in gladness, shouting loudly,</p>
			<p class="t0">And as they went on shipboard<span class="hst">  </span>all were heard to sing, and set forth proudly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After these daring sailors<span class="hst">  </span>had cast off from the land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Many sorrowing women<span class="hst">  </span>did at the windows stand:</p>
			<p class="t0">From Matelan’s lofty castle,<span class="hst">  </span>never the watch forsaking,</p>
			<p class="t0">Their eyes the sea-path followed,<span class="hst">  </span>as from the land the men their way were taking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A friendly wind was blowing,<span class="hst">  </span>and loudly cracked the mast;</p>
			<p class="t0">They the sails stretched tightly,<span class="hst">  </span>and left the land at last.</p>
			<p class="t0">The son of many a mother<span class="hst">  </span>went, for honor seeking;</p>
			<p class="t0">Though this awaited many,<span class="hst">  </span>yet to gain it they must toil be taking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">I cannot tell you fully<span class="hst">  </span>of all that them befell,</p>
			<p class="t0">Save that the lord of Karadie,<span class="hst">  </span>who in that land did dwell,</p>
			<p class="t0">With fighters came to help them,<span class="hst">  </span>the foeman never fearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">He from home brought with him<span class="hst">  </span>ten thousand knights, all men of strength and daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Where foes upon the Wulpensand<span class="hst">  </span>had met in deadly fray,</p>
			<p class="t0">These knights from many a kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>now, at this later day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Chose the spot for meeting;<span class="hst">  </span>and here they came together:</p>
			<p class="t0">A church had here been builded,<span class="hst">  </span>and old and young alike had their gifts brought hither.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now within its harbor,<span class="hst">  </span>to seek their fathers’ graves,</p>
			<p class="t0">Out of the ships here gathered<span class="hst">  </span>went many of Hilda’s braves.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bitter was their sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>and anger keen did waken;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hard would it be for any<span class="hst">  </span>who erst in fight the lives of their friends had taken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Unto the lord of Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>they hearty welcome gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">Four and twenty broad-boats<span class="hst">  </span>he brought with warriors brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">Food therein was laden<span class="hst">  </span>that might for all have lasted</p>
			<p class="t0">Till twenty years were ended:<span class="hst">  </span>to war with the Normans now they gladly hasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they to sail were ready,<span class="hst">  </span>they left the sheltering shore</p>
			<p class="t0">To make their way o’er the waters;<span class="hst">  </span>but heavy toil they bore</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the wild sea-billows<span class="hst">  </span>before their sail was ended.</p>
			<p class="t0">What helped it that their leaders,<span class="hst">  </span>Fru-te the Dane and Wâ-te, them befriended?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A wind from the south was blowing,<span class="hst">  </span>and drove them out to sea.</p>
			<p class="t0">The crew of warlike shipmates<span class="hst">  </span>from fear no more were free;</p>
			<p class="t0">They could not find the bottom,<span class="hst">  </span>altho’ they should be casting</p>
			<p class="t0">Lengths of rope a thousand;<span class="hst">  </span>many sailors wept, their lot foretasting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before the mount at Givers<span class="hst">  </span>soon lay Queen Hilda’s host;</p>
			<p class="t0">However good their anchors,<span class="hst">  </span>upon that gloomy coast,</p>
			<p class="t0">Drawn by loadstones thither,<span class="hst">  </span>they a long time rested.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their masts so tough and hardy<span class="hst">  </span>soon before their eyes were bent and twisted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the hopeless sailors<span class="hst">  </span>were weeping o’er their lot,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus spoke the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Anchors again throw out,</p>
			<p class="t0">The strongest and the heaviest,<span class="hst">  </span>into the sea unsounded.</p>
			<p class="t0">I’ve heard of many wonders<span class="hst">  </span>I would rather see, than here on the rocks be grounded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Since, astray long sailing,<span class="hst">  </span>our lady’s ships here lie,</p>
			<p class="t0">And we so far are driven<span class="hst">  </span>across the darkling sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">I now will tell a sea-tale,<span class="hst">  </span>that stirred my childish wonder,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of how, near the mount at Givers,<span class="hst">  </span>a kingdom erst was built by a mighty founder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Men there in wealth are living;<span class="hst">  </span>so rich is all their land</p>
			<p class="t0">That under the flowing rivers<span class="hst">  </span>silver is the sand;</p>
			<p class="t0">With this they make their castles,<span class="hst">  </span>and the stones are golden</p>
			<p class="t0">With which their walls are builded.<span class="hst">  </span>In all the kingdom none in want are holden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“’Twas told to me, moreover,<span class="hst">  </span>(by God are wonders wrought,)</p>
			<p class="t0">If one who by the loadstone<span class="hst">  </span>unto this mount is brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">Here will only tarry<span class="hst">  </span>till the wind from the land is blowing,</p>
			<p class="t0">He with all his kindred<span class="hst">  </span>may be forever rich when homeward going.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Let us our food be eating<span class="hst">  </span>until our luck shall turn,”</p>
			<p class="t0">Said then the aged Wâ-te;<span class="hst">  </span>“before we hence are borne,</p>
			<p class="t0">Our ships that here are lying<span class="hst">  </span>shall with ore be loaded:</p>
			<p class="t0">When this we home shall carry,<span class="hst">  </span>wealth shall we have that no one e’er foreboded.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the Danish Fru-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“A still, unruffled sea</p>
			<p class="t0">Shall never keep in idleness<span class="hst">  </span>the men now here with me:</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand times I swear to you,<span class="hst">  </span>no gold would I be seeking,</p>
			<p class="t0">But rather away from this mountain,<span class="hst">  </span>with friendly winds, would I my way be taking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The Christian men among them<span class="hst">  </span>raised to Heaven a prayer;</p>
			<p class="t0">But yet the ships ne’er yielded,<span class="hst">  </span>strongly fastened there:</p>
			<p class="t0">For four long days or over<span class="hst">  </span>all their hopes were thwarted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Sorely feared the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>that they from thence could nevermore be started.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The clouds now lifted higher,<span class="hst">  </span>as the mighty God had willed;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then no more they sorrowed,<span class="hst">  </span>for soon the waves were stilled,</p>
			<p class="t0">And from out the darkness<span class="hst">  </span>the sun was shining brightly.</p>
			<p class="t0">A wind from the west was blowing,<span class="hst">  </span>and now the woes were o’er of the wanderers knightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For miles full six and twenty,<span class="hst">  </span>past Givers’ craggy shore,</p>
			<p class="t0">The ships at last were wafted.<span class="hst">  </span>By this they saw yet more</p>
			<p class="t0">The work of God and his goodness,<span class="hst">  </span>in all the help then given.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te with his followers<span class="hst">  </span>had been too near the rocks of loadstone driven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To smoothly flowing waters<span class="hst">  </span>they now were come at last:</p>
			<p class="t0">Their sins were not rewarded,<span class="hst">  </span>and all their woes were past,</p>
			<p class="t0">While fear from them was taken,<span class="hst">  </span>since God was not unwilling.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ships that bore the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>straight to the Norman land at length were sailing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But soon among the sailors<span class="hst">  </span>arose again a wail;</p>
			<p class="t0">For now the ships were groaning,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon began to reel,</p>
			<p class="t0">Tossed among the breakers<span class="hst">  </span>that overwhelmed them nearly:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the brave knight Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“We now indeed must buy our honors dearly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Outspake then one of the sailors:<span class="hst">  </span>“Alas! and well-a-day!</p>
			<p class="t0">I would we were at Givers,<span class="hst">  </span>and dead near its mountain lay!</p>
			<p class="t0">If one is by God forgotten,<span class="hst">  </span>by whom is he befriended?</p>
			<p class="t0">My brave and hardy warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>the roar of the blustering sea is not yet ended.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then cried the knight, Sir Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>he of the Danish land:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Be of good heart, brave fellows;<span class="hst">  </span>I well can understand</p>
			<p class="t0">This wind no harm will do us;<span class="hst">  </span>from out the west ’tis blowing.”</p>
			<p class="t0">This cheered the lord of Karadie,<span class="hst">  </span>on him and on his men fresh hope bestowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Horant, the daring warrior,<span class="hst">  </span>up to the topmast climbed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And the widely stretching billows<span class="hst">  </span>swept, with eyes undimmed,</p>
			<p class="t0">Keeping for land an outlook.<span class="hst">  </span>They soon his call were hearing:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Wait you now, unfearing;<span class="hst">  </span>I see that we the Norman land are nearing!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The word to all was given,<span class="hst">  </span>that they should lower sail:</p>
			<p class="t0">Searching the waters over,<span class="hst">  </span>they saw far off a hill,</p>
			<p class="t0">Lofty, and thickly wooded,<span class="hst">  </span>with groves and leafage shaded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then old Wâ-te bade them<span class="hst">  </span>thither to bend their way, and this they heeded.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c23">Tale the Twenty-Third.<br/><span class="small">HOW HILDA’S WARRIORS LANDED IN SIGHT OF HARTMUT’S KINGDOM.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before the hill they landed,<span class="hst">  </span>in sight of the leafy grove;</p>
			<p class="t0">Wary to be, and daring,<span class="hst">  </span>them did it now behoove.</p>
			<p class="t0">First they dropped their anchors,<span class="hst">  </span>deep the waters under;</p>
			<p class="t0">In a lonely spot were they hidden,<span class="hst">  </span>where none could see, nor at their coming wonder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then from the ships, to rest them,<span class="hst">  </span>they stepped upon the beach.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hey! what they had longed for<span class="hst">  </span>was now within their reach!</p>
			<p class="t0">A stream of pure, cold water,<span class="hst">  </span>through the fir-trees flowing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ran down the wooded hillside,<span class="hst">  </span>upon the wave-worn knights new life bestowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While the weary warriors<span class="hst">  </span>were resting and asleep,</p>
			<p class="t0">Irold soon had clambered,<span class="hst">  </span>there his watch to keep,</p>
			<p class="t0">Into a tree high-branching.<span class="hst">  </span>He then began to ponder</p>
			<p class="t0">Which way they should be taking;<span class="hst">  </span>and, lo! the Norman land he saw with wonder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Now, my youths, be merry!”<span class="hst">  </span>thus cried the youthful knight.</p>
			<p class="t0">“My cares indeed are lightened,<span class="hst">  </span>for now I have in sight</p>
			<p class="t0">Seven lofty palaces,<span class="hst">  </span>with roomy halls wide-spreading;</p>
			<p class="t0">Before to-morrow’s midday,<span class="hst">  </span>the land of Normandy shall we be treading.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the wise old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Up to the sands now bear</p>
			<p class="t0">All your shields and weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>whate’er in fight you wear.</p>
			<p class="t0">Let every one be busy,<span class="hst">  </span>and let the youths be hastened;</p>
			<p class="t0">At once lead out the horses;<span class="hst">  </span>helmets and breastplates must with straps be fastened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“And now, if any outfits<span class="hst">  </span>are not good to wear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor meet for you in fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>to that I’ll give my care.</p>
			<p class="t0">The queen, my lady Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>has sent with us already</p>
			<p class="t0">Full five hundred breastplates;<span class="hst">  </span>these will we give to any who are needy.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quickly were the horses<span class="hst">  </span>forth on the sea-beach led;</p>
			<p class="t0">And all the showy horse-cloths,<span class="hst">  </span>that should on them be spread,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were by the men unfolded,<span class="hst">  </span>and laid on steeds in waiting,</p>
			<p class="t0">To see which best beseemed them;<span class="hst">  </span>and each then took the one he deemed most fitting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In leaping, and in galloping<span class="hst">  </span>up and down the shore,</p>
			<p class="t0">They rode, and watched the horses;<span class="hst">  </span>many, strong before,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now were dull and sluggish,<span class="hst">  </span>nor longer quick at running;</p>
			<p class="t0">Too long had they been standing,<span class="hst">  </span>and Wâ-te had them killed, as not worth owning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Fires by the men were lighted;<span class="hst">  </span>and good and hearty food,</p>
			<p class="t0">The best that could be met with<span class="hst">  </span>so near the shore and flood,</p>
			<p class="t0">By the tired and hungry wanderers<span class="hst">  </span>soon was cooked and eaten.</p>
			<p class="t0">They had not hoped beforehand<span class="hst">  </span>that rest like this their toilsome life would sweeten.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Throughout the night they rested,<span class="hst">  </span>till dawn of the coming day.</p>
			<p class="t0">To Ortwin Wâ-te and Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>each his mind did say;</p>
			<p class="t0">Talking aside on the seashore,<span class="hst">  </span>many a threat was spoken</p>
			<p class="t0">Against their Norman foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>who into the Hegeling castle erst had broken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Men must we now be sending,”<span class="hst">  </span>to them young Ortwin said,</p>
			<p class="t0">“Who shall tidings bring us,<span class="hst">  </span>if they be not yet dead,</p>
			<p class="t0">About my long-lost sister<span class="hst">  </span>and many a homeless maiden;</p>
			<p class="t0">For when on them I’m thinking,<span class="hst">  </span>my heart is heavy, oft with sorrow laden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Together they bethought them,<span class="hst">  </span>whom they hence should send,</p>
			<p class="t0">By whom the news they wished for<span class="hst">  </span>might with truth be gained,</p>
			<p class="t0">And who could tell them rightly<span class="hst">  </span>where to find the maiden;</p>
			<p class="t0">By them, too, must the errand<span class="hst">  </span>on which they came, from foes be wisely hidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the youthful Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>who from Ortland came,</p>
			<p class="t0">A faithful knight as any:<span class="hst">  </span>“Myself for the search I name;</p>
			<p class="t0">The maid, Gu-drun, is my sister,<span class="hst">  </span>child of my father and mother;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of all, however worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>am I more fit to go than any other.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the kingly Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“I too will go with thee;</p>
			<p class="t0">To live or die I am ready,<span class="hst">  </span>seeking the maid to free.</p>
			<p class="t0">To you she is a sister,<span class="hst">  </span>but to me for a wife they gave her;</p>
			<p class="t0">To her am I ever faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>nor for a day uncared-for will I leave her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then quoth Wâ-te angrily:<span class="hst">  </span>“’Tis childish thus to speak,</p>
			<p class="t0">Brave and chosen warriors:<span class="hst">  </span>such risks you should not seek,</p>
			<p class="t0">And this for truth I tell you.<span class="hst">  </span>Spurn you not my warning;</p>
			<p class="t0">Should you be found by Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>you’ll on his gallows hang, your rashness mourning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him King Herwic answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Though good or ill betide,</p>
			<p class="t0">Friends should aye be friendly,<span class="hst">  </span>standing side by side.</p>
			<p class="t0">I and my friend, young Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>will ne’er the task give over,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever shall befall us,<span class="hst">  </span>and search will make till we Gu-drun recover.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now upon this errand<span class="hst">  </span>both were bent to go,</p>
			<p class="t0">They sent for friends and kinsfolk,<span class="hst">  </span>and did their wishes show.</p>
			<p class="t0">They bade them to be faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>and said the oaths then taken</p>
			<p class="t0">Must never be forgotten,<span class="hst">  </span>and they who went must never be forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Of your pledges I remind you,”<span class="hst">  </span>the youthful Ortwin said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“If we, by foemen taken,<span class="hst">  </span>should be in bondage led,</p>
			<p class="t0">You with gold must free us,<span class="hst">  </span>and so our bonds must loosen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Lands must you sell and castles,<span class="hst">  </span>nor ever sorrow feel that thus you’ve chosen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“And, warriors brave, now hearken<span class="hst">  </span>to what we more will say;</p>
			<p class="t0">If foes our life begrudge us,<span class="hst">  </span>and us in fight shall slay,</p>
			<p class="t0">Be not our death forgotten,<span class="hst">  </span>let it on them be wroken:</p>
			<p class="t0">Your swords in Hartmut’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>must make your daring there be loudly spoken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This we further bid you,<span class="hst">  </span>my good and well-born knights:</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en though, with toil the hardest,<span class="hst">  </span>every warrior fights,</p>
			<p class="t0">Let not those homeless maidens<span class="hst">  </span>be by you forsaken;</p>
			<p class="t0">Until the strife is settled,<span class="hst">  </span>let not their hope and trust in you be shaken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Their faith then freely pledging,<span class="hst">  </span>each gave to the king his hand;</p>
			<p class="t0">And all the best among them<span class="hst">  </span>swore that home and land</p>
			<p class="t0">They nevermore would look on,<span class="hst">  </span>but still afar would tarry,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until again to their homesteads<span class="hst">  </span>they from the Norman land the maids should carry.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All of them were faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>but yet were weeping sore;</p>
			<p class="t0">They feared the hate of Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>and ills for them in store.</p>
			<p class="t0">That they could send no others<span class="hst">  </span>they were deeply mourning;</p>
			<p class="t0">And all were sadly thinking,<span class="hst">  </span>“No one now can death from them be turning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All day they talked together;<span class="hst">  </span>it now was near its end:</p>
			<p class="t0">The sun, that low was sinking,<span class="hst">  </span>thro’ clouds its beams did send:</p>
			<p class="t0">Erelong it sank o’er Gulstred,<span class="hst">  </span>and there at last was hidden.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortwin and Herwic tarried,<span class="hst">  </span>that night to go, by the waning light forbidden.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c24">Tale the Twenty-fourth.<br/><span class="small">HOW THEIR COMING WAS MADE KNOWN TO GUDRUN.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of them we speak no longer;<span class="hst">  </span>we now will let you hear</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet more about the maidens:<span class="hst">  </span>how hope their lot did cheer</p>
			<p class="t0">Who on a far-off seashore<span class="hst">  </span>must wearily toil at washing:</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun and Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>must wash all day on the sands where waves were dashing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">’Twas the time of spring-tide fasting,<span class="hst">  </span>and at the noon of day.</p>
			<p class="t0">To them a swan came floating;<span class="hst">  </span>thereat Gu-drun ’gan say:</p>
			<p class="t0">“O bird so fair and lovely,<span class="hst">  </span>such pain for me thou art feeling,</p>
			<p class="t0">That now thou hither speedest<span class="hst">  </span>from a far-off land, across the water sailing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to her in answer<span class="hst">  </span>spake the friendly swan,</p>
			<p class="t0">Although a God-sent angel,<span class="hst">  </span>in speech most like a man:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Words from God I bring you;<span class="hst">  </span>if you for this be seeking,</p>
			<p class="t0">Tidings I give of your kindred;<span class="hst">  </span>of these, most high-born maid, would I be speaking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>his speech so wondrous heard,</p>
			<p class="t0">Scarce could she believe it,<span class="hst">  </span>that thus an untamed bird,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now, within her hearing,<span class="hst">  </span>in tones like these had spoken.</p>
			<p class="t0">While to him she listened,<span class="hst">  </span>it seemed that his words from the mouth of a man had broken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the bird-like angel:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hopeful you now may be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Homeless, sorrowing maiden;<span class="hst">  </span>gladness shall come to thee.</p>
			<p class="t0">If you would hear of your birth-land,<span class="hst">  </span>listen while I tell you;</p>
			<p class="t0">From there I bring you tidings,<span class="hst">  </span>for God hath sent me, of your woes to heal you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At this, Gu-drun, the fair one,<span class="hst">  </span>upon the sands down fell;</p>
			<p class="t0">Crossing her arms, the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>her lowly prayers did tell.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then she said to Hildeburg:<span class="hst">  </span>“God hath us in his keeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">And help to us has granted;<span class="hst">  </span>we now no more shall sorrow know, nor weeping.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the bird then said the maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Christ has sent thee here</p>
			<p class="t0">To us, poor homeless maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>our heavy hearts to cheer;</p>
			<p class="t0">Good and trusted harbinger,<span class="hst">  </span>tidings tell yet other:</p>
			<p class="t0">Is now Queen Hilda living?<span class="hst">  </span>Of poor Gu-drun is she the much-loved mother.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The Heaven-sent bird thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“This can I say to thee;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hilda, thy queenly mother,<span class="hst">  </span>in health did I lately see.</p>
			<p class="t0">To search for thee already<span class="hst">  </span>her warriors she has banded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Such throngs no kin or widow,<span class="hst">  </span>seeking for friends, on foeman’s shore e’er landed.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the high-born maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Good tidings thou dost bear:</p>
			<p class="t0">Be thou with me not weary,<span class="hst">  </span>still more I fain would hear.</p>
			<p class="t0">Lives yet my brother Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>as king in Ortland dwelling,</p>
			<p class="t0">And Herwic, my betrothéd?<span class="hst">  </span>’Twould gladden me could’st thou this news be telling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The bird-like angel answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That can I gladly tell;</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic and young King Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>are both alive and well.</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the swelling billows,<span class="hst">  </span>that rose and sank unending,</p>
			<p class="t0">I saw those knightly sailors;<span class="hst">  </span>each with even stroke to his oar was bending.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “This tell me also,<span class="hst">  </span>if ’tis known to thee,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whether Morunc and Irold<span class="hst">  </span>are now upon the sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">And hither come to seek me;<span class="hst">  </span>the truth I fain would gather.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gladly I would see them,<span class="hst">  </span>for they are kin to Hettel, who was my father.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her the bird thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That can I tell you, too;</p>
			<p class="t0">Morunc, and with him Irold,<span class="hst">  </span>I saw, in search of you.</p>
			<p class="t0">They to this land are coming;<span class="hst">  </span>their help will soon be given</p>
			<p class="t0">To fight for you, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>and many a helmet will by them be riven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the winged angel:<span class="hst">  </span>“I bid you now farewell,</p>
			<p class="t0">And leave you in God’s keeping,<span class="hst">  </span>for work awaits me still.</p>
			<p class="t0">I overstay my errand<span class="hst">  </span>to linger here, yet speaking.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then from their sight he faded,<span class="hst">  </span>and left the maidens’ hearts well-nigh to breaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“My sorrows none can know;</p>
			<p class="t0">Much that I wished to ask thee,<span class="hst">  </span>now must I forego.</p>
			<p class="t0">For the sake of Christ, I beg thee,<span class="hst">  </span>ere thou alone dost leave me,</p>
			<p class="t0">Poor and wretched maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>that freedom from my woes thou yet wilt give me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before her eyes he floated,<span class="hst">  </span>and once again he spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ere yet we two are parted,<span class="hst">  </span>and hence my way I take,</p>
			<p class="t0">If I in aught can help you,<span class="hst">  </span>of that I will not weary,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, since through Christ you ask it,<span class="hst">  </span>to tell you of your kin will longer tarry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “I fain were hearing,<span class="hst">  </span>if thou the truth hast learned,</p>
			<p class="t0">If Horant, lord of Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>his way has hither turned,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with him leads his kinsmen?<span class="hst">  </span>They leave me here forsaken.</p>
			<p class="t0">Knowing him brave and daring,<span class="hst">  </span>I would my lonely lot his care might waken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“From Denmark sailing hither,<span class="hst">  </span>Horant, your kinsman, comes;</p>
			<p class="t0">He to war is leading<span class="hst">  </span>his followers from their homes.</p>
			<p class="t0">The banner of Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>aloft in his hand he is bearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Tis thus the Hegeling warriors<span class="hst">  </span>now the Norman Hartmut’s land are nearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun then asked him further:<span class="hst">  </span>“This would I also hear:</p>
			<p class="t0">Lives Wâ-te still of Sturmland?<span class="hst">  </span>If so, no more I fear.</p>
			<p class="t0">We all might then be happy,<span class="hst">  </span>if thou could’st this be telling,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That under the flag of my mother<span class="hst">  </span>he and the aged Fru-te are hither sailing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her the angel answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hither comes in haste</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te the old from Sturmland.<span class="hst">  </span>He in his hand holds fast</p>
			<p class="t0">The strong and guiding rudder,<span class="hst">  </span>and Fru-te’s ship is steering.</p>
			<p class="t0">Truer friends or better<span class="hst">  </span>you ne’er need wish their swords for you were bearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Once more the bird was ready<span class="hst">  </span>upon his way to go;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the wretched maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“I still am full of woe;</p>
			<p class="t0">And now to know am longing—<span class="hst">  </span>if life such bliss can lend me—</p>
			<p class="t0">When I, poor homeless maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>shall see my mother’s knights, whom she doth send me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The angel answered quickly:<span class="hst">  </span>“Your happiness is near;</p>
			<p class="t0">To-morrow morning early,<span class="hst">  </span>will two brave knights be here.</p>
			<p class="t0">Both are true and upright,<span class="hst">  </span>and falsehood ne’er will tell you;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever news they bring you<span class="hst">  </span>you well may trust, and never will it fail you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last the heavenly angel<span class="hst">  </span>hence in truth must go:</p>
			<p class="t0">From him the homeless maidens<span class="hst">  </span>sought no more to know.</p>
			<p class="t0">In mind they ever wavered,<span class="hst">  </span>’twixt hope and fear still tossing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Where their helpers lingered<span class="hst">  </span>they could not know, yet trust were never losing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Lazily and slowly<span class="hst">  </span>they washed the livelong day;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of knights sent there by Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>who now were on their way</p>
			<p class="t0">From over the Hegeling border,<span class="hst">  </span>busily they chatted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun’s good, faithful kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>were by the long-lost maids uneasily awaited.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Each day must have its ending;<span class="hst">  </span>to the castle now must go</p>
			<p class="t0">The weary, homesick maidens.<span class="hst">  </span>They there must harshness know</p>
			<p class="t0">From evil-minded Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>who their lives still harrowed;</p>
			<p class="t0">A day went by but seldom<span class="hst">  </span>that she scolded them not, nor still their bondage narrowed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thus she spoke to the maidens:<span class="hst">  </span>“Who gave the word to you</p>
			<p class="t0">That you might wash so slowly<span class="hst">  </span>my clothes and linen, too?</p>
			<p class="t0">All the things I gave you<span class="hst">  </span>must be quickly whitened;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twere best that you be careful,<span class="hst">  </span>you else shall weep, and for your lives be frightened.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered her young Hildeburg:<span class="hst">  </span>“Our work we ever mind;</p>
			<p class="t0">Truly you ought, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>to be to us more kind.</p>
			<p class="t0">We oft are almost freezing,<span class="hst">  </span>with water o’er us splashing;</p>
			<p class="t0">If only the winds were warmer,<span class="hst">  </span>we might for you far better then be washing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Grimly answered Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>and roughly them did twit:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whatever be the weather,<span class="hst">  </span>my work you may not slight.</p>
			<p class="t0">Early must you be washing,<span class="hst">  </span>nor rest till night be knowing;</p>
			<p class="t0">To-morrow morn, at daybreak,<span class="hst">  </span>you from my room must down to the beach be going.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I ween you know already<span class="hst">  </span>that Holytide is near;</p>
			<p class="t0">Palm-Sunday soon is coming,<span class="hst">  </span>and guests will then be here:</p>
			<p class="t0">If to ill-washed clothing<span class="hst">  </span>my knights shall then be treated,</p>
			<p class="t0">Never in kingly castle<span class="hst">  </span>to those who washed have woes like yours been meted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the maidens left her;<span class="hst">  </span>they laid aside, all wet,</p>
			<p class="t0">The clothing they were wearing—<span class="hst">  </span>they better care should get.</p>
			<p class="t0">All they had known of kindness<span class="hst">  </span>for them no longer lasted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And soon for this they sorrowed,<span class="hst">  </span>for bread and water now was all they tasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the downcast maidens<span class="hst">  </span>for sleep had sought their bed;</p>
			<p class="t0">But this was not the softest,<span class="hst">  </span>and each one, in her need,</p>
			<p class="t0">A dirty shirt was wearing.<span class="hst">  </span>Thus was Gerlind showing</p>
			<p class="t0">Her care and kindness for them,<span class="hst">  </span>on benches hard a pillow ne’er bestowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Never Gu-drun, poor maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>on a harder bed had lain;</p>
			<p class="t0">All were tired with watching<span class="hst">  </span>till day should dawn again.</p>
			<p class="t0">They had but broken slumber;<span class="hst">  </span>I ween, they oft bethought them</p>
			<p class="t0">How soon the knights were coming,<span class="hst">  </span>of whom the angel-bird the news had brought them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as the morning lightened,<span class="hst">  </span>Hildeburg the good,</p>
			<p class="t0">Erst from Galicia stolen,<span class="hst">  </span>at the window gazing stood;</p>
			<p class="t0">All night she slept but little,<span class="hst">  </span>but on her bed lay tossing.</p>
			<p class="t0">She saw that snow had fallen,<span class="hst">  </span>and hope the heart-sick maid was wellnigh losing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the hapless maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“To wash we now must go.</p>
			<p class="t0">Should God not change the weather,<span class="hst">  </span>and we, in storm and snow,</p>
			<p class="t0">To-day must stand a-washing,<span class="hst">  </span>before the evening cometh</p>
			<p class="t0">We, all chilled and barefoot,<span class="hst">  </span>shall dead be found, while us the cold benumbeth.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By hope they yet were gladdened,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en as they well might be,</p>
			<p class="t0">That those sent out by Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>they ere night should see.</p>
			<p class="t0">When the lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>upon this thought were dwelling,</p>
			<p class="t0">It made them now more happy,<span class="hst">  </span>and lighter was the pain their hearts were feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“My friend, you should beseech</p>
			<p class="t0">The stern, ill-minded Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>that on the pebbly beach</p>
			<p class="t0">Shoes she will allow us;<span class="hst">  </span>she may herself be learning</p>
			<p class="t0">That if we go there barefoot<span class="hst">  </span>we soon shall freeze, and there our death be earning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The maidens then went seeking<span class="hst">  </span>King Ludwig and his queen.</p>
			<p class="t0">He, in sleep held fondly,<span class="hst">  </span>in Gerlind’s arms was seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Both were sunk in slumber,<span class="hst">  </span>and the maids, their anger fearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Dared not them to waken:<span class="hst">  </span>erelong Gu-drun yet greater woe was bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The weeping of the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>by the sleeping queen was heard,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who quick began to chide<span class="hst">  </span>them with many a surly word:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Why, you heedless maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>are you not to the seashore going,</p>
			<p class="t0">There to wash my clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>and rinse them with clean water o’er them flowing?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said Gu-drun, in sorrow:<span class="hst">  </span>“I know not where to go,</p>
			<p class="t0">For in the night has fallen<span class="hst">  </span>a deep and heavy snow.</p>
			<p class="t0">That we by death be stricken<span class="hst">  </span>unless you now are willing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Do not send us washing;<span class="hst">  </span>to stand without our shoes will us be killing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her the she-wolf answered;<span class="hst">  </span>“That I do not fear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now to the shore betake you,<span class="hst">  </span>or weal or woe to bear.</p>
			<p class="t0">If you be slow in washing,<span class="hst">  </span>my wrath may you be dreading;</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en if you die, what care I?”<span class="hst">  </span>At this the hopeless maids more tears were shedding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Taking then the clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>they went to the water’s brink:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Of this,” said Gu-drun,<span class="hst">  </span>“God willing, I will make you think.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, in the cold, barefooted,<span class="hst">  </span>through the snow they waded;</p>
			<p class="t0">The very high-born maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>forsaken in their woe, were worn and faded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Down to the beach they plodded,<span class="hst">  </span>as was their wont before,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bearing the clothing with them<span class="hst">  </span>to the bleak and sandy shore.</p>
			<p class="t0">They once more were standing,<span class="hst">  </span>over the washing stooping;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever they were thinking<span class="hst">  </span>of their sorry plight, and sadly were they hoping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Often now, and earnestly,<span class="hst">  </span>over the watery waste,</p>
			<p class="t0">While they toiled and sorrowed,<span class="hst">  </span>longing looks they cast;</p>
			<p class="t0">Still of those now dreaming<span class="hst">  </span>sent by the queen to free them,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who o’er the sea were sailing.<span class="hst">  </span>The high-born maidens hoped erelong to see them.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c25">Tale the Twenty-Fifth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HERWIC AND ORTWIN FOUND GUDRUN.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After they long had waited,<span class="hst">  </span>now saw these washers lone</p>
			<p class="t0">Two in a boat fast nearing;<span class="hst">  </span>others were there none.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the maiden, Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>unto Gu-drun, the lady:</p>
			<p class="t0">“These two are sailing hither;<span class="hst">  </span>perhaps the friends sent here are come already.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She, full of sorrow, answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Ah, woe is me, poor maid!</p>
			<p class="t0">Although, in truth I’m happy,<span class="hst">  </span>I yet am also sad.</p>
			<p class="t0">If at the seaside washing<span class="hst">  </span>Queen Hilda’s men shall see us,</p>
			<p class="t0">Standing thus barefooted,<span class="hst">  </span>we from the shame of this can never free us.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“A poor, unhappy woman,<span class="hst">  </span>I know not what to do:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hildeburg, my dearest,<span class="hst">  </span>your mind now let me know;</p>
			<p class="t0">To hide me were it better,<span class="hst">  </span>or shall I stay to shame me</p>
			<p class="t0">When they shall find me toiling?<span class="hst">  </span>Rather would I that they a drudge should name me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the maiden Hildeburg:<span class="hst">  </span>“E’en how it stands you see;</p>
			<p class="t0">A thing that is so weighty<span class="hst">  </span>you should not leave to me,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er you think the better,<span class="hst">  </span>your choice will I be sharing;</p>
			<p class="t0">With you I’ll stay forever,<span class="hst">  </span>both good, and ill together with you bearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then from the water turning,<span class="hst">  </span>both fled away in haste;</p>
			<p class="t0">But now the boat of the sailors<span class="hst">  </span>had neared the land so fast,</p>
			<p class="t0">They saw the lovely washers,<span class="hst">  </span>away from the seashore hieing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And at once bethought them<span class="hst">  </span>that they for shame away from the clothes were flying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They called unto the maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>as they sprang upon the beach:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whither so fast are you fleeing,<span class="hst">  </span>fair washers, we beseech?</p>
			<p class="t0">We are far-off wanderers,<span class="hst">  </span>as well our looks are showing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Your linen may be stolen,<span class="hst">  </span>if you leave it here, and from us in haste are going.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They kept their way still swiftly,<span class="hst">  </span>as if they heard it not:</p>
			<p class="t0">But yet the boisterous shouting<span class="hst">  </span>had reached their ears, I wot.</p>
			<p class="t0">The bold and knightly Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>too roughly bade them hear him,</p>
			<p class="t0">For he not yet mistrusted<span class="hst">  </span>’twas his betrothed that now he saw so near him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Cried Herwic, lord of Sealand:<span class="hst">  </span>“Maidens fair and young,</p>
			<p class="t0">Tell us now, we pray you,<span class="hst">  </span>to whom these clothes belong.</p>
			<p class="t0">We ask you in all honor,<span class="hst">  </span>by the faith to maidens owing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Most fair and lovely ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>that back to the shore you will again be going.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the maid, then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“It were a shame, forsooth,</p>
			<p class="t0">Since to the trust of woman<span class="hst">  </span>you give your pledge in truth,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were I of this unworthy,<span class="hst">  </span>nor faith in you were showing:</p>
			<p class="t0">To the shore we back will hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>although my eyes with tears are overflowing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They, in their smocks, came nearer;<span class="hst">  </span>both with the sea were wet.</p>
			<p class="t0">Before that time, the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>were always clean and neat;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the wretched drudges<span class="hst">  </span>with cold and frost were quaking;</p>
			<p class="t0">Little of late had they eaten,<span class="hst">  </span>and with the March-like winds were chilled and shaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The time had come already<span class="hst">  </span>for snows to melt away,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, with each other vying,<span class="hst">  </span>the little birds, each day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Again their songs would warble,<span class="hst">  </span>as soon as March was ended;</p>
			<p class="t0">But in the snow, and ice-cold,<span class="hst">  </span>the maids were found forlorn, and unbefriended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Stiff were their locks and frosted,<span class="hst">  </span>when they now drew near;</p>
			<p class="t0">However well and carefully<span class="hst">  </span>they had smoothed their hair,</p>
			<p class="t0">It now was tossed and tumbled<span class="hst">  </span>by the wind so wildly blowing:</p>
			<p class="t0">Hard bestead were the maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>toiling there, whether it rained or was snowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The ice was loose and broken,<span class="hst">  </span>floating everywhere</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon the sea before them.<span class="hst">  </span>The maids were filled with care;</p>
			<p class="t0">Pale were now their bodies,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en as the snow around them,</p>
			<p class="t0">By their scanty clothes scarce hidden.<span class="hst">  </span>Sad was the lot in which the knights had found them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the high-born Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>a kind “Good-morning” bade</p>
			<p class="t0">To the sad and homeless maidens;<span class="hst">  </span>of this sore need they had,</p>
			<p class="t0">For oft their keeper, Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>had them with harshness taunted.</p>
			<p class="t0">To hear “Good-morning,” “Good-evening,”<span class="hst">  </span>was now to the maids but very seldom granted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the youthful Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“I beg you say to me</p>
			<p class="t0">To whom belongs this clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>that on the sands I see?</p>
			<p class="t0">For whom are you here washing?<span class="hst">  </span>You both are so comely showing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who can this shame have done you?<span class="hst">  </span>May God bring low the man such outrage doing!</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“So fair are you and lovely,<span class="hst">  </span>you well might wear the crown;</p>
			<p class="t0">If all that is your birthright<span class="hst">  </span>you now could call your own,</p>
			<p class="t0">You would, in truth, be worthy<span class="hst">  </span>to be with ladies seated.</p>
			<p class="t0">Has he for whom you are toiling<span class="hst">  </span>more such washers fair so foully treated?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>in greatest sorrow spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Many he hath beside us<span class="hst">  </span>who fairer still do look.</p>
			<p class="t0">All that you list now ask us;<span class="hst">  </span>yet, with eye unsleeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">One from the leads doth watch us,<span class="hst">  </span>who ne’er will forgive the talk with you we’re keeping.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Be not at this uneasy,<span class="hst">  </span>but deign our gold to take,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with it these four arm-bands.<span class="hst">  </span>These your reward we make,</p>
			<p class="t0">If you, most lovely ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>of speech will not be wary;</p>
			<p class="t0">To you we give them gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>if of the truth we seek you be not chary.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“God leave to you your arm-bands,<span class="hst">  </span>albeit you we thank;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nought for hire may you give us,”<span class="hst">  </span>quoth the lady high in rank.</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ask what you will, but quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>for we must hence be going;</p>
			<p class="t0">If we were seen here with you,<span class="hst">  </span>nothing but sorrow should we then be knowing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“We beg you first to tell us<span class="hst">  </span>who this land doth own?</p>
			<p class="t0">Whose are the castles also?<span class="hst">  </span>By what name is he known</p>
			<p class="t0">Who leaves you without clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>low tasks upon you laying?</p>
			<p class="t0">He may of his worth be boastful;<span class="hst">  </span>that he doeth well no man may now be saying.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him Gu-drun thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hartmut is one of the lords</p>
			<p class="t0">To whom these lands owe fealty.<span class="hst">  </span>His castles well he guards,</p>
			<p class="t0">With Ludwig, king of the Normans,<span class="hst">  </span>who is Hartmut’s father:</p>
			<p class="t0">And many knightly vassals,<span class="hst">  </span>to keep their lands from foes, they round them gather.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Gladly would we see them,”<span class="hst">  </span>said Ortwin, the friendly knight;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Happy were I, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>if we could learn aright</p>
			<p class="t0">Where, within their kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>we might those kings be meeting,</p>
			<p class="t0">We bring to them an errand;<span class="hst">  </span>as henchmen of a king, we bear his greeting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the high-born lady,<span class="hst">  </span>thus to the warrior spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“This very morning early,<span class="hst">  </span>ere yet they were awake,</p>
			<p class="t0">I left them in their castle;<span class="hst">  </span>in their beds they slumbered.</p>
			<p class="t0">I know not if thence they have ridden:<span class="hst">  </span>their men, I think, full forty hundred numbered.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Again King Herwic asked her:<span class="hst">  </span>“To us yet further tell,</p>
			<p class="t0">Why is it such brave princes<span class="hst">  </span>in fear like this should dwell,</p>
			<p class="t0">That they so many warriors<span class="hst">  </span>always should be needing?</p>
			<p class="t0">Had I that band of fighters,<span class="hst">  </span>to gain a kingdom I would them be leading.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him Gu-drun thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Of that we nothing know;</p>
			<p class="t0">And where their lands are lying,<span class="hst">  </span>that neither can we show:</p>
			<p class="t0">But from the Hegeling kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>although it is not near them,</p>
			<p class="t0">They fear that harm awaits them<span class="hst">  </span>from foes who soon may come, who hatred bear them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Trembling, cold, and shivering,<span class="hst">  </span>the maids before them stood;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the knightly Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>spake, in kindly mood:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I would, most lovely ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>if we might be so daring,</p>
			<p class="t0">And if no shame it gave you,<span class="hst">  </span>that on the shore our cloaks you would be wearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hilda’s daughter answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“May God your kindness bless;</p>
			<p class="t0">We cannot take your mantles,<span class="hst">  </span>but we thank you none the less.</p>
			<p class="t0">No eye shall ever see me<span class="hst">  </span>manly clothing wearing.”</p>
			<p class="t0">If only the maidens knew it,<span class="hst">  </span>much greater ills would they yet be often bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Oft the eyes of Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>did on the maiden rest;</p>
			<p class="t0">To him she seemed most comely,<span class="hst">  </span>and her bearing was the best.</p>
			<p class="t0">For all her heavy sorrows<span class="hst">  </span>sighs in his heart were wakened;</p>
			<p class="t0">And to one erst thought of kindly,<span class="hst">  </span>from him long taken, he the maiden likened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake again young Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>who was of Ortland king:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Can either of you ladies<span class="hst">  </span>tidings whatever bring</p>
			<p class="t0">Of a band of homeless maidens<span class="hst">  </span>who to this land were carried?</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun was one among them,<span class="hst">  </span>and gladly would we learn where she has tarried.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him the maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To me is that well known;</p>
			<p class="t0">A maiden throng came hither<span class="hst">  </span>in days now long bygone:</p>
			<p class="t0">They to this far-off kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>by fighters bold were taken;</p>
			<p class="t0">And full of heavy sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>came these maids forlorn, of hope forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“The maid whom you are seeking<span class="hst">  </span>I know,” she said, “full well;</p>
			<p class="t0">I here have seen her toiling,<span class="hst">  </span>this for a truth I tell.”</p>
			<p class="t0">She was herself the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>who was by Hartmut stolen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, Queen Hilda’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>and all she told had erst herself befallen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“Ortwin, list to me:</p>
			<p class="t0">If fair Gu-drun, your sister,<span class="hst">  </span>yet alive may be,</p>
			<p class="t0">In any land whatever,<span class="hst">  </span>for us on earth still watching,</p>
			<p class="t0">This must be that lady;<span class="hst">  </span>ne’er have I seen two maids so nearly matching.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him then said young Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“The maid in truth is fair,</p>
			<p class="t0">But to my long-lost sister<span class="hst">  </span>no likeness doth she bear.</p>
			<p class="t0">The days are not forgotten<span class="hst">  </span>when we were young together;</p>
			<p class="t0">Should I rove the whole world over,<span class="hst">  </span>so fair as she I ne’er could find another.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now Gu-drun, who listened,<span class="hst">  </span>heard the name of the man,</p>
			<p class="t0">That his friend did call him Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>she looked at him again:</p>
			<p class="t0">For she indeed were happy<span class="hst">  </span>if she were thus befriended,</p>
			<p class="t0">And found in him a brother,<span class="hst">  </span>for then her cares were o’er and her sorrows ended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“However they may call you,<span class="hst">  </span>a worthy knight are you:</p>
			<p class="t0">A man in all things like you<span class="hst">  </span>in days of yore I knew;</p>
			<p class="t0">The name of Herwic bore he,<span class="hst">  </span>in Sealand was his dwelling.</p>
			<p class="t0">If that brave knight were living,<span class="hst">  </span>to loose us from our bonds he were not failing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I am one of the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>whom Hartmut’s warriors stole,</p>
			<p class="t0">And bore across the waters,<span class="hst">  </span>in thraldom sorrowful.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun you here are seeking,<span class="hst">  </span>but need not thus have hasted;</p>
			<p class="t0">The queenly Hegeling maiden<span class="hst">  </span>at last is dead, with toil and hardship wasted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The eyes of Ortwin glistened,<span class="hst">  </span>filling fast with tears;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor was it without weeping<span class="hst">  </span>that now King Herwic hears</p>
			<p class="t0">The tidings to them given,—<span class="hst">  </span>that fair Gu-drun, their lady,</p>
			<p class="t0">From them by death was taken;<span class="hst">  </span>at this their heavy hearts to break were ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When both, before her weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>were seen by the homeless maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">With eyes upon them fastened,<span class="hst">  </span>thus to them she said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“It seems to me most likely,<span class="hst">  </span>by the mood that you are wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">That to Gu-drun, the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>you worthy knights are love and kinship bearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her young Herwic answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Yes, for the maid, forsooth,</p>
			<p class="t0">I shall pine till life be ended;<span class="hst">  </span>to me she gave her troth,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to me, in wedlock plighted,<span class="hst">  </span>with faithful oaths was given:</p>
			<p class="t0">Since then, by the craft of Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>her have I lost, by him from her birthland riven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the sorrowing maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Your words would me mislead,</p>
			<p class="t0">For men have often told me<span class="hst">  </span>that Herwic long is dead.</p>
			<p class="t0">No bliss on earth were greater,<span class="hst">  </span>that God to me were granting,</p>
			<p class="t0">Could I learn that he is living;<span class="hst">  </span>a friend to lead me hence were then not wanting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the knightly Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“Upon my hand now look;</p>
			<p class="t0">Know you this ring I am wearing?<span class="hst">  </span>Mine is the name you spoke;</p>
			<p class="t0">With this were we betrothéd:<span class="hst">  </span>to Gu-drun I am faithful ever,</p>
			<p class="t0">And if you were my loved one,<span class="hst">  </span>I would lead you hence, and would forsake you never.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Upon his hand then looking,<span class="hst">  </span>a ring there met her sight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Set with a stone from Abalie,<span class="hst">  </span>in gold that glittered bright;</p>
			<p class="t0">Never her eyes had rested<span class="hst">  </span>on one more rich or fairer.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the queenly maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>of this same ring had whilom been the wearer.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The happy maiden, smiling,<span class="hst">  </span>with words her bliss did show:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Of this I once was owner,<span class="hst">  </span>and well the ring I know.</p>
			<p class="t0">Look upon this I am wearing;<span class="hst">  </span>’twas the gift of my early lover,</p>
			<p class="t0">While I, a gladsome maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>still dwelt at home, nor stepped its borders over.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He, on her hand now gazing,<span class="hst">  </span>upon the ring did look;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then unto the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>the knightly Herwic spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“That a queenly mother bore thee,<span class="hst">  </span>I see by many a token;</p>
			<p class="t0">After my heavy sorrows,<span class="hst">  </span>a blessed sight upon my eyes has broken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then in his arms he folded<span class="hst">  </span>the fair and high-born maid:</p>
			<p class="t0">For all they told each other<span class="hst">  </span>they were both glad and sad.</p>
			<p class="t0">He kissed the maiden fondly,<span class="hst">  </span>how oft I cannot reckon;</p>
			<p class="t0">So, too, he greeted Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>showing his love to both the maids forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the youthful Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>begged the maid to say</p>
			<p class="t0">Whether to do her task-work<span class="hst">  </span>there was no other way</p>
			<p class="t0">Than, standing by the seaside,<span class="hst">  </span>all day to wash the clothing?</p>
			<p class="t0">At this she greatly sorrowed,<span class="hst">  </span>and felt for her work the deepest shame and loathing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Tell me now, fair sister,<span class="hst">  </span>where may your children be</p>
			<p class="t0">Whom you have borne to Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>in his land across the sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">That all alone on the seashore<span class="hst">  </span>to wash they thus allow you?</p>
			<p class="t0">If here a queen they call you,<span class="hst">  </span>the name you bear but little good can do you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Shedding tears, she answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“How should I have a child?</p>
			<p class="t0">No love could Hartmut kindle,<span class="hst">  </span>that I to him should yield;</p>
			<p class="t0">And well do all men know it<span class="hst">  </span>who near him here are dwelling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Because I would not love him<span class="hst">  </span>I now must toil, and woe my heart is swelling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the knightly Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“We now can truly say</p>
			<p class="t0">That we good luck have met with,<span class="hst">  </span>on our errand far away;</p>
			<p class="t0">And nought could have befallen<span class="hst">  </span>that for us were better.</p>
			<p class="t0">It behooves us now to hasten<span class="hst">  </span>to free the maid from the ills that here beset her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the knight, young Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“That may never be.</p>
			<p class="t0">Had I a hundred sisters,<span class="hst">  </span>I would sooner let them die</p>
			<p class="t0">Than here, in another’s kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>to hide a deed of plunder;</p>
			<p class="t0">Stealing those from our foemen<span class="hst">  </span>whom they by stormy fight from us did sunder.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the lord of Sealand:<span class="hst">  </span>“This do I greatly fear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Should our search be known to any,<span class="hst">  </span>or if they find us here,</p>
			<p class="t0">They then may take the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>and her far hence may carry,</p>
			<p class="t0">And never shall we see her:<span class="hst">  </span>’twere best to hide the deed, nor longer tarry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Him did Ortwin answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“How can we leave in need</p>
			<p class="t0">Her faithful band of maidens?<span class="hst">  </span>So long a stay they’ve made</p>
			<p class="t0">Here in this land of foemen<span class="hst">  </span>that well may they be weary:</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, my worthy sister,<span class="hst">  </span>should ne’er forsake her maids, in bondage dreary.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him then spake brave Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“Is this in truth your mind?</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er shall my well-belovéd<span class="hst">  </span>be left by me behind;</p>
			<p class="t0">To take the ladies with us,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en as we can, ’tis better.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Him did Ortwin answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“Here to be hacked with the sword for me were fitter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the downcast maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“What have I done to thee,</p>
			<p class="t0">My dearest brother Ortwin?<span class="hst">  </span>Never as yet in me</p>
			<p class="t0">Was seen such ill-behavior<span class="hst">  </span>that I for that was chidden.</p>
			<p class="t0">For what great sin I know not<span class="hst">  </span>am I, my lord, to make atonement bidden?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I do not thus, dear sister,<span class="hst">  </span>for want of love to thee;</p>
			<p class="t0">Thereby your band of maidens<span class="hst">  </span>I shall the better free.</p>
			<p class="t0">Only as fits my honor,<span class="hst">  </span>hence will I ever take you;</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic for your lover<span class="hst">  </span>you yet shall have, and ne’er will he forsake you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun was heavy-hearted<span class="hst">  </span>as they went on board the boat;</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “Woe worth my wanderings!<span class="hst">  </span>my sorrow endeth not.</p>
			<p class="t0">He whom once I trusted,<span class="hst">  </span>must hope in him be shaken</p>
			<p class="t0">That he will break my bondage?<span class="hst">  </span>My bliss is yet far off, and my faith mistaken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In haste the daring warriors<span class="hst">  </span>turned from the shore away.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the maid, heart-broken,<span class="hst">  </span>to Herwic called to stay:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Of me you once thought highly,<span class="hst">  </span>but now you hold me lightly:</p>
			<p class="t0">To whom, in my woe, do you leave me?<span class="hst">  </span>Bereft of kin, to whom can I trust me rightly?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I do not hold you lightly;<span class="hst">  </span>you are of maids the best.</p>
			<p class="t0">My coming, queenly lady,<span class="hst">  </span>hide within your breast;</p>
			<p class="t0">Again, ere morning lightens,<span class="hst">  </span>these shores will I be treading,—</p>
			<p class="t0">For this my troth I pledge you,—<span class="hst">  </span>eighty thousand followers with me leading.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As fast as they were able<span class="hst">  </span>they hastened then away;</p>
			<p class="t0">Never friends were sundered<span class="hst">  </span>more sadly than that day</p>
			<p class="t0">Were these from one another;<span class="hst">  </span>(the truth to you I’m telling.)</p>
			<p class="t0">As far as their eyes could follow,<span class="hst">  </span>the maidens watched the boat away fast sailing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the queenly maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>her washing now forgot;</p>
			<p class="t0">Betwixt her bliss and sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>her toil she heeded not.</p>
			<p class="t0">The harsh and wicked Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>the idle women spying</p>
			<p class="t0">Standing by the seashore,<span class="hst">  </span>in anger stormed, that her clothes unwashed were lying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the maiden Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>from Ireland, o’er the sea:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Why do you let the clothing<span class="hst">  </span>here uncared for be?</p>
			<p class="t0">The clothes of Ludwig’s followers<span class="hst">  </span>still unwashed are waiting.</p>
			<p class="t0">If this be known to Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>yet harder blows from her shall we be getting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda’s daughter answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Too proud I am, I ween,</p>
			<p class="t0">That for the wicked Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>I e’er should wash again.</p>
			<p class="t0">Henceforth a toil so lowly<span class="hst">  </span>in scorn shall I be holding,</p>
			<p class="t0">For two young kings have kissed me,<span class="hst">  </span>they in kindness me in their arms enfolding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Hildeburg made answer:<span class="hst">  </span>“Scorn not that I should teach</p>
			<p class="t0">Or that I now would show you<span class="hst">  </span>how best the clothes to bleach:</p>
			<p class="t0">We must not leave them yellow,<span class="hst">  </span>but carefully must whiten;</p>
			<p class="t0">Else do I greatly fear me<span class="hst">  </span>our backs with blows and stripes will well be beaten.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said old Hagen’s grandchild:<span class="hst">  </span>“At last my lot is bright,</p>
			<p class="t0">With hope and gladness beaming.<span class="hst">  </span>If they my back shall smite</p>
			<p class="t0">With rods, from now till morning,<span class="hst">  </span>I trow it will not kill me;</p>
			<p class="t0">But soon shall those who wronged us<span class="hst">  </span>know themselves the ills they chose to deal me.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“These clothes I should be washing<span class="hst">  </span>down to the tide I’ll bear,</p>
			<p class="t0">And fling them into the water,”<span class="hst">  </span>said the maiden fair;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Their freedom I will give them,<span class="hst">  </span>even as ’tis fitting</p>
			<p class="t0">That I, a queen, should do it;<span class="hst">  </span>hence they may float away, no hindrance meeting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Whate’er was said by Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun the clothes then took,</p>
			<p class="t0">That Gerlind her had given;<span class="hst">  </span>her task she would not brook,</p>
			<p class="t0">But far into the billows<span class="hst">  </span>she threw them, strongly hurling:</p>
			<p class="t0">I know not if ever she found them;<span class="hst">  </span>they soon were lost to sight, in the waters swirling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The night was drawing nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>and the light began to wane;</p>
			<p class="t0">To the castle, heavy-laden,<span class="hst">  </span>went Hildeburg again.</p>
			<p class="t0">Seven robes of finest linen<span class="hst">  </span>she bore, with other clothing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, young Ortwin’s sister,<span class="hst">  </span>with Hildeburg went also, bearing nothing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they had reached the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>the time was very late.</p>
			<p class="t0">Before King Ludwig’s palace,<span class="hst">  </span>standing at the gate,</p>
			<p class="t0">They saw the wicked Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>watching there to meet them:</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon as she saw the washers,<span class="hst">  </span>with words of bitter scorn she ’gan to greet them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thus she spake in anger:<span class="hst">  </span>“What does this gadding mean?</p>
			<p class="t0">Stripes upon your bodies<span class="hst">  </span>you both have earned, I ween,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus upon the seashore,<span class="hst">  </span>in the evening light, to wander;</p>
			<p class="t0">For me it were unseemly<span class="hst">  </span>into my room to take you, after loitering yonder.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “Now tell me quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>think you this is meet?</p>
			<p class="t0">You spurn the greatest princes,<span class="hst">  </span>and show them nought but hate,</p>
			<p class="t0">But linger yet, at nightfall,<span class="hst">  </span>with low-born varlets flirting.</p>
			<p class="t0">Would you be thought of highly,<span class="hst">  </span>know you that this your own good name is hurting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The well-born maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Why speak of me so ill?</p>
			<p class="t0">Never have I, poor maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>had the thought or will</p>
			<p class="t0">With any man to tattle,<span class="hst">  </span>however dear I held him,</p>
			<p class="t0">Unless it were a kinsman;<span class="hst">  </span>a talk with him I rightfully might yield him.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Say you I chide you wrongly?<span class="hst">  </span>Hush, you idle jade!</p>
			<p class="t0">For this, to-night, I tell you,<span class="hst">  </span>a reckoning shall be made.</p>
			<p class="t0">To be so bold and shameless<span class="hst">  </span>you then will dare no longer;</p>
			<p class="t0">Before with you I’ve ended,<span class="hst">  </span>your back shall feel that I than you am stronger.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“In that will I gainsay you,”<span class="hst">  </span>said then the maiden proud;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Again with rods to beat me<span class="hst">  </span>you ne’er shall be allowed.</p>
			<p class="t0">You and all your kindred<span class="hst">  </span>in birth are far below me;</p>
			<p class="t0">You may yet for this be sorry,<span class="hst">  </span>if treatment so unseemly you shall show me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the wolfish Gerlind:<span class="hst">  </span>“Where is my clothing left,</p>
			<p class="t0">That, folded in your apron,<span class="hst">  </span>you thus your hands have wrapt;</p>
			<p class="t0">Bearing yourself so idly,<span class="hst">  </span>now from toil thus turning?</p>
			<p class="t0">If I live a little longer,<span class="hst">  </span>another kind of work shall you be learning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">King Hagen’s grandchild answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Down by the deep sea-flood</p>
			<p class="t0">I left your clothing lying.<span class="hst">  </span>It was too great a load;</p>
			<p class="t0">I found the weight too heavy,<span class="hst">  </span>alone to the house to carry.</p>
			<p class="t0">If never again you see them,<span class="hst">  </span>but little I care, the while with you I tarry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then quoth the old she-devil:<span class="hst">  </span>“All this shall help you not;</p>
			<p class="t0">Before I sleep this evening,<span class="hst">  </span>bitter shall be your lot!”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then were tied, at her bidding,<span class="hst">  </span>rods from hedges broken;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gerlind would not give over<span class="hst">  </span>the training hard ’gainst which the maid had spoken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then strongly to a bedstead<span class="hst">  </span>she bade them bind the maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">And alone in a room to leave her,<span class="hst">  </span>where not a friend she had:</p>
			<p class="t0">There should she be beaten,<span class="hst">  </span>till skin from bone was falling.</p>
			<p class="t0">When this was known to her women,<span class="hst">  </span>they all began to weep, and loud were wailing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake Gu-drun, with cunning:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now list to what I say:</p>
			<p class="t0">If I with rods am beaten<span class="hst">  </span>thus shamefully to-day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Should e’er an eye behold me<span class="hst">  </span>with kings and princes seated,</p>
			<p class="t0">And I a crown be wearing,<span class="hst">  </span>to you a fit reward shall then be meted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Henceforth for me such teaching<span class="hst">  </span>’twere best you let alone;</p>
			<p class="t0">Sooner the king I’ve slighted<span class="hst">  </span>shall have me for his own:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then as queen of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>here will I be dwelling;</p>
			<p class="t0">And when I here am mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>what I will do may no one now be telling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Be this your will,” said Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>“angry no more I’ll be:</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en if a thousand garments<span class="hst">  </span>you thus had lost for me,</p>
			<p class="t0">I would, in truth, forgive it;<span class="hst">  </span>well you will have thriven</p>
			<p class="t0">If to my son, young Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>the Norman prince, your love at last be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the lovely maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“I now would take some rest;</p>
			<p class="t0">This care and heavy sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>my strength doth sorely waste.</p>
			<p class="t0">Send for the young King Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>bid him be hither speeding,</p>
			<p class="t0">And say, whate’er he wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>that I henceforth will always do his bidding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those who heard them talking,<span class="hst">  </span>straightway to Hartmut ran,</p>
			<p class="t0">And to the youthful warrior<span class="hst">  </span>told the tale again.</p>
			<p class="t0">Some of his father’s liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>there with him were seated,</p>
			<p class="t0">When word to him was given<span class="hst">  </span>in haste to seek Gu-drun, who for him waited.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the one who told him:<span class="hst">  </span>“Give me now my fee;</p>
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda’s lovely daughter<span class="hst">  </span>will grant her love to thee.</p>
			<p class="t0">She bids you now to hasten<span class="hst">  </span>at once to her in her bower;</p>
			<p class="t0">No longer are you hated,<span class="hst">  </span>for better thoughts she harbors than of yore.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high-born knight then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To lie you have no need.</p>
			<p class="t0">If true indeed were your tidings,<span class="hst">  </span>well should you be feed;</p>
			<p class="t0">By me would three great castles<span class="hst">  </span>and a hide of land be given,</p>
			<p class="t0">With sixty golden arm-bands;<span class="hst">  </span>while bliss thenceforth my days should long enliven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to him another:<span class="hst">  </span>“This tale, I know, is true;</p>
			<p class="t0">The fee should I be sharing.<span class="hst">  </span>At court they wish for you;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the maid, has said it.<span class="hst">  </span>To love you she is ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">And if in truth you wish it,<span class="hst">  </span>she in your land will be your queen and lady.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To those who told the tidings<span class="hst">  </span>his thanks young Hartmut gave;</p>
			<p class="t0">From off his seat, o’er-gladdened,<span class="hst">  </span>upsprang the warrior brave.</p>
			<p class="t0">He thought that, in His kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>God this boon had done him,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, with a heart now happy,<span class="hst">  </span>he sought the maiden’s bower who love had shown him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In garments wet there standing,<span class="hst">  </span>was seen the high-born maid;</p>
			<p class="t0">With eyes still dim with weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>greeting to him she said.</p>
			<p class="t0">Forward she came to meet him;<span class="hst">  </span>and now so near was standing</p>
			<p class="t0">That he, in fondness turning,<span class="hst">  </span>her in his arms would clasp, towards her bending.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “Not so, King Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>this you may not do;</p>
			<p class="t0">For men in truth would wonder<span class="hst">  </span>if they should look on you.</p>
			<p class="t0">Nought am I but a washer;<span class="hst">  </span>in scorn would they be holding</p>
			<p class="t0">You, a king so mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>if in your arms Gu-drun you should be folding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This will I, Sir Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>freely to you allow,</p>
			<p class="t0">When, by my crown, your kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>me as a queen shall know.</p>
			<p class="t0">No longer shall I scorn you,<span class="hst">  </span>when I that name am bearing:</p>
			<p class="t0">For both will this be fitting;<span class="hst">  </span>me in your arms to take you may then be daring.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then, with all good-breeding,<span class="hst">  </span>he farther off withdrew,</p>
			<p class="t0">And thus Gu-drun he answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Maiden fair and true,</p>
			<p class="t0">Since now you deign to love me,<span class="hst">  </span>richly will I reward you;</p>
			<p class="t0">Myself and all my kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>whate’er you bid, will kindness show toward you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to him the maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Such bliss I never knew.</p>
			<p class="t0">If, after my weary toiling,<span class="hst">  </span>I aught may ask of you,</p>
			<p class="t0">This first of all I wish for,<span class="hst">  </span>that I, poor wretched lady,</p>
			<p class="t0">This night, before I slumber,<span class="hst">  </span>may have for me a restful bath made ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“And list to me yet further:<span class="hst">  </span>another boon I crave;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Tis that my friendly maidens<span class="hst">  </span>I now with me may have.</p>
			<p class="t0">Among Queen Gerlind’s women<span class="hst">  </span>you will find them, sad and weary;</p>
			<p class="t0">But in their room no longer<span class="hst">  </span>those toiling ones away from me must tarry.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Your wish I grant you freely,”<span class="hst">  </span>the young King Hartmut said.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then from the room of the women<span class="hst">  </span>the many maids were led;</p>
			<p class="t0">With hair unkempt and streaming,<span class="hst">  </span>and scanty clothing wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">They to court betook them:<span class="hst">  </span>for them the wicked Gerlind nought was caring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of these came three and sixty;<span class="hst">  </span>on them did Hartmut look.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Gu-drun, the high-born,<span class="hst">  </span>with lofty breeding spoke:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Behold, my lord, these maidens!<span class="hst">  </span>Is it your worth befitting</p>
			<p class="t0">That they are thus uncared for?”<span class="hst">  </span>He said: “No more shall they the like be meeting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the high-born lady:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hartmut, for love of me,</p>
			<p class="t0">I beg that these my maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>whom here in shame you see,</p>
			<p class="t0">May have a bath made ready.<span class="hst">  </span>Let now my word be heeded;</p>
			<p class="t0">You ought yourself to see them<span class="hst">  </span>decked in the comely clothes they long have needed.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her then answered Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>of knights a worthy one:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Gu-drun, belovéd lady,<span class="hst">  </span>if clothes the maids have none</p>
			<p class="t0">Erst by them brought hither,<span class="hst">  </span>when they their home were leaving,</p>
			<p class="t0">To them yet other clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>the best in all the world, will I be giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Gladly would I see them,<span class="hst">  </span>with you, more fitly clad.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then by those in waiting<span class="hst">  </span>baths were ready made.</p>
			<p class="t0">Among the kin of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>chamberlains many were there;</p>
			<p class="t0">To help Gu-drun they hastened,<span class="hst">  </span>thinking that later she their hopes would further.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun and all her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>were by the bath made glad;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the best of clothing<span class="hst">  </span>that any ever had</p>
			<p class="t0">To all the homeless women<span class="hst">  </span>alike was freely given.</p>
			<p class="t0">The lowliest one among them<span class="hst">  </span>might gain the love of a king, if she had striven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they their bath had taken,<span class="hst">  </span>wine to them was brought;</p>
			<p class="t0">In all the land of Normandy<span class="hst">  </span>none better need be sought;</p>
			<p class="t0">And soon the weary maidens<span class="hst">  </span>the best of mead were drinking.</p>
			<p class="t0">To Hartmut thanks were given;<span class="hst">  </span>to gain such praises how could he e’er be thinking!</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>was seated in the hall.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gerlind bade her daughter<span class="hst">  </span>then, with her maidens all,</p>
			<p class="t0">To don their clothing quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>the finest and most fitting,</p>
			<p class="t0">If they Queen Hilda’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>wished to see, among her maidens sitting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At once the well-born Ortrun<span class="hst">  </span>clothed her in her best;</p>
			<p class="t0">To seek Gu-drun then straightway<span class="hst">  </span>gladly did she haste.</p>
			<p class="t0">The grandchild of wild Hagen<span class="hst">  </span>quickly went to meet her;</p>
			<p class="t0">When they saw each other,<span class="hst">  </span>the happiness of both was never greater.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Each one kissed the other,<span class="hst">  </span>’neath a band of gold on her head;</p>
			<p class="t0">The hue of both was brighter<span class="hst">  </span>for the golden light they shed.</p>
			<p class="t0">Each in her way was happy;<span class="hst">  </span>Ortrun’s eyes were beaming,</p>
			<p class="t0">To see the high-born washer<span class="hst">  </span>in finest clothes now clad, so comely seeming.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The poor Gu-drun was blithesome,<span class="hst">  </span>as we have said before,</p>
			<p class="t0">That soon her friendly kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>she would see once more.</p>
			<p class="t0">The maidens sat together,<span class="hst">  </span>with playful talk now gladdened;</p>
			<p class="t0">Whoever looked upon them<span class="hst">  </span>might gain a happy heart, however saddened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“’Tis well for me,” said Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>“that I have lived till now,</p>
			<p class="t0">When as the wife of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>you here yourself will show.</p>
			<p class="t0">To one who loves my brother<span class="hst">  </span>gladly will I give her</p>
			<p class="t0">The crown of my mother, Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>that I of right should wear did I outlive her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Ortrun, may God reward you,”<span class="hst">  </span>thus the maiden spake;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Whatever you shall bid me,<span class="hst">  </span>that will I do for your sake.</p>
			<p class="t0">You have bewept so often<span class="hst">  </span>the sorrows I was bearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">From you will I ne’er be sundered,<span class="hst">  </span>and every day shall you my love be sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then with maiden wiliness<span class="hst">  </span>spake the fair Gu-drun:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now you ought, Sir Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>to send out runners soon,</p>
			<p class="t0">Through all the Norman kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>to give to friends your bidding,</p>
			<p class="t0">As many as will hear it,<span class="hst">  </span>to come to your palace now, to see our wedding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“When peace is in your borders,<span class="hst">  </span>this to you I say,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before your host of warriors<span class="hst">  </span>I will wear the crown one day.</p>
			<p class="t0">How many he has who woos me<span class="hst">  </span>thus shall I be knowing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then before your liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>myself and all my kin will I be showing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The maid in truth was crafty;<span class="hst">  </span>from the castle on that day</p>
			<p class="t0">A hundred men or over<span class="hst">  </span>did Hartmut send away.</p>
			<p class="t0">So, when the Hegeling fighters<span class="hst">  </span>should for him be seeking,</p>
			<p class="t0">Fewer foes should meet them:<span class="hst">  </span>for this was Gu-drun their going thence bespeaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the old Queen Gerlind:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now, fair daughter mine,</p>
			<p class="t0">You two must leave each other;<span class="hst">  </span>when another morn shall shine,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then may you be together,<span class="hst">  </span>with none your bliss forbidding.”</p>
			<p class="t0">She left Gu-drun, low bowing,<span class="hst">  </span>and begged that God would her in his ways be leading.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then did Hartmut leave her.<span class="hst">  </span>All hearkened to her word;</p>
			<p class="t0">They gave to the maiden cup-bearers,<span class="hst">  </span>and carvers at the board:</p>
			<p class="t0">The high-born lady’s wishes<span class="hst">  </span>they bade should well be heeded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor food nor drink she wanted:<span class="hst">  </span>busy were they to bring her all she needed.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake one lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>among the Hegeling band:</p>
			<p class="t0">“When we on this are thinking,<span class="hst">  </span>how from our fatherland</p>
			<p class="t0">Our foes have brought us hither,<span class="hst">  </span>to live unblest forever,</p>
			<p class="t0">We still are bowed with sorrow;<span class="hst">  </span>when in our homes, such woe we thought of never.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She then began a-weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>where sat her lady fair.</p>
			<p class="t0">When this was seen by others<span class="hst">  </span>who stood beside her there,</p>
			<p class="t0">They felt yet greater sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>their heavy hearts now filling.</p>
			<p class="t0">All then wept together;<span class="hst">  </span>but they saw their mistress, fair Gu-drun, was smiling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They thought that now forever<span class="hst">  </span>they far from home must stay:</p>
			<p class="t0">But their lady ne’er was thinking<span class="hst">  </span>to bide so long away;</p>
			<p class="t0">They would, ere four days later,<span class="hst">  </span>their freedom all be knowing.</p>
			<p class="t0">The time had come already<span class="hst">  </span>to whisper to Gerlind that they would soon be going.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Beyond her wont a little<span class="hst">  </span>to laugh had the maid begun;</p>
			<p class="t0">For fourteen years now bygone<span class="hst">  </span>she never bliss had known.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of her glee the bad she-devil<span class="hst">  </span>quickly now was hearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">She gave the hint to Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>for care she felt, and anger past all bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She went at once to Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and said: “Oh, son of mine,</p>
			<p class="t0">List to the truth I tell you!<span class="hst">  </span>throughout this land of thine,</p>
			<p class="t0">All within it dwelling<span class="hst">  </span>shall see both strife and toiling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Why it is I know not,<span class="hst">  </span>the fair young queen, Gu-drun, is now so smiling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I know not how it happened,<span class="hst">  </span>or how the news she heard,</p>
			<p class="t0">But men sent out by her kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>hither to come have dared.</p>
			<p class="t0">Therefore, knightly Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>some way must you be choosing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Lest, thro’ the friends she looks for,<span class="hst">  </span>your worthy name and life you may be losing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “Be not so fearful.<span class="hst">  </span>I grudge it not to the maid</p>
			<p class="t0">That she, with all her women,<span class="hst">  </span>should for a time be glad.</p>
			<p class="t0">All her nearest kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>far from me are dwelling;</p>
			<p class="t0">What harm can they be doing?<span class="hst">  </span>I need not guard ’gainst ills they may be dealing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, now over-wearied,<span class="hst">  </span>some of her maidens sent</p>
			<p class="t0">To see if her bed were ready,<span class="hst">  </span>for she on sleep was bent;</p>
			<p class="t0">For a night at least her sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>she could now be leaving.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then went with them most kindly<span class="hst">  </span>King Hartmut’s chamberlain, his service giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Youths of the Norman palace<span class="hst">  </span>before her bore the light;</p>
			<p class="t0">On her they ne’er had waited<span class="hst">  </span>until that very night.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thirty beds or over<span class="hst">  </span>now were found made ready;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nice were they and cleanly,<span class="hst">  </span>meet for Gu-drun and many a well-born lady.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On them were pillows lying<span class="hst">  </span>from far Arabia brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">With green, like leaves of clover,<span class="hst">  </span>and other hues, inwrought.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bedspreads on them hanging<span class="hst">  </span>were sewed in strips most fairly;</p>
			<p class="t0">And red as fire was shining<span class="hst">  </span>the gold mixed in with silken threads not sparely.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Beneath the silken bedspreads<span class="hst">  </span>fishes’ skins were laid,</p>
			<p class="t0">To make them thicker and warmer.<span class="hst">  </span>The fair and lovely maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thither come from the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut would be wooing,</p>
			<p class="t0">For he as yet knew nothing<span class="hst">  </span>of the harm to him that her friends would soon be doing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the high-born maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“To sleep you now may go,</p>
			<p class="t0">All you that wait on Hartmut;<span class="hst">  </span>we, too, the same will do.</p>
			<p class="t0">I, and my ladies with me,<span class="hst">  </span>one night at least will rest us;</p>
			<p class="t0">For, since our coming hither,<span class="hst">  </span>freedom from hardest toil hath never blest us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All who there were gathered<span class="hst">  </span>of Hartmut’s knights and men,</p>
			<p class="t0">The wise as well as youthful,<span class="hst">  </span>thence to go were seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">They to rest then hasted,<span class="hst">  </span>the ladies’ bower now leaving.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wine and mead unstinted<span class="hst">  </span>to the homeless maids were others freely giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now shut for me the door.”</p>
			<p class="t0">They barred the ladies’ bedroom<span class="hst">  </span>with heavy bolts full four:</p>
			<p class="t0">The room was shut so tightly<span class="hst">  </span>that what therein was doing,</p>
			<p class="t0">However much one listened,<span class="hst">  </span>outside he nought could hear, nor might be knowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Awhile they all were seated,<span class="hst">  </span>merrily drinking wine;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said Gu-drun, the queenly:<span class="hst">  </span>“Dearest maidens mine,</p>
			<p class="t0">You well may now be happy,<span class="hst">  </span>after your heavy sorrow:</p>
			<p class="t0">Your friends I soon will show you;<span class="hst">  </span>on gladsome sights your eyes shall feed to-morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Herwic, my betrothéd,<span class="hst">  </span>did I this morning kiss,</p>
			<p class="t0">And Ortwin, too, my brother;<span class="hst">  </span>you now may think on this.</p>
			<p class="t0">She shall soon be richer,<span class="hst">  </span>and care from her be taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who shall well be mindful,<span class="hst">  </span>when night is over, me in the morn to waken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“You well shall be rewarded.<span class="hst">  </span>To us glad days are nigh:</p>
			<p class="t0">And freely will I give you<span class="hst">  </span>castles strong and high,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with them many acres;<span class="hst">  </span>for these shall I be gaining,</p>
			<p class="t0">If I the day shall witness<span class="hst">  </span>when, as a queen, I o’er my lands am reigning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They now lay down to slumber,<span class="hst">  </span>with hearts all free from care.</p>
			<p class="t0">They knew to them were speeding<span class="hst">  </span>knights full brave to dare,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who erelong would help them,<span class="hst">  </span>and their woes would lighten.</p>
			<p class="t0">To see them they were hoping,<span class="hst">  </span>soon as to-morrow’s sun the day should brighten.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c26">Tale the Twenty-Sixth.<br/><span class="small">HOW THE HEGELINGS LANDED NEAR LUDWIG’S CASTLE.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">We ask you now to listen<span class="hst">  </span>to a tale as yet untold:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortwin still and Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>their way did onward hold</p>
			<p class="t0">Until they found their followers<span class="hst">  </span>on the seashore standing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then ran these Hegeling liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>to meet them on the sands where they were landing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Them they gladly welcomed,<span class="hst">  </span>and bade that they make known</p>
			<p class="t0">The news that they were bringing,<span class="hst">  </span>and freely all to own.</p>
			<p class="t0">First they asked of Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>if he could them be telling,</p>
			<p class="t0">If still Gu-drun were living,<span class="hst">  </span>and if in Ludwig’s land she now was dwelling?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The knightly Ortwin answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Of this I may not speak</p>
			<p class="t0">To each and all that ask it;<span class="hst">  </span>the truth I will not break</p>
			<p class="t0">Till all are met together;<span class="hst">  </span>then shall you be hearing</p>
			<p class="t0">All that our eyes there greeted,<span class="hst">  </span>when we to come near Hartmut’s walls were daring.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The word was told to others,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon a mighty band</p>
			<p class="t0">Of warriors brave and knightly<span class="hst">  </span>around the two did stand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to them said Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“Sad is the news I give you,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, were my wishes granted,<span class="hst">  </span>gladly I’d spare the tale, for much ’twill grieve you.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“List to what has happened,<span class="hst">  </span>for wonders now begin;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, my long-lost sister,<span class="hst">  </span>I, in truth, have seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with her also Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>erst in Ireland living.”</p>
			<p class="t0">When he the tidings gave them,<span class="hst">  </span>they thought the tale he told not worth believing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All then said together:<span class="hst">  </span>“It is not well to jest;</p>
			<p class="t0">For her we long have waited,<span class="hst">  </span>and now our time you waste.</p>
			<p class="t0">We hoped from Ludwig’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>you would bring her sooner;</p>
			<p class="t0">To Ortwin and his followers<span class="hst">  </span>belong the shame and blame for wrongs still done her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Ask you, then, King Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>he, too, has seen the maid;</p>
			<p class="t0">And he can also tell you<span class="hst">  </span>what wrongs on us are laid.</p>
			<p class="t0">Could you, my friends, bethink you<span class="hst">  </span>of any shame that’s greater?</p>
			<p class="t0">We found Gu-drun and Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>upon the seashore standing, washing in the water.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon were his kindred weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>all who there were seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">At this the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>right scornful was, I ween:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Truly for women only<span class="hst">  </span>is such behavior fitting;</p>
			<p class="t0">Why you weep you know not.<span class="hst">  </span>This, in a knight, one never should be meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“But if you are in earnest,<span class="hst">  </span>to help Gu-drun in her need,</p>
			<p class="t0">The clothes that she has whitened<span class="hst">  </span>must you in war make red.</p>
			<p class="t0">Erst white hands did wash them<span class="hst">  </span>for men who must be bleeding;</p>
			<p class="t0">So you now may help her,<span class="hst">  </span>and soon the maid forlorn be homeward leading.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the Danish Fru-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“How can this be done?</p>
			<p class="t0">How can we reach their kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>before our plan is known,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before the men of Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hartmut’s knights, are learning</p>
			<p class="t0">That Hilda’s friends are gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>and toward the Norman land at length are turning?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Hear what ’tis best to do;</p>
			<p class="t0">I trust before his castle<span class="hst">  </span>fitly to meet the foe,</p>
			<p class="t0">If I may live to see him<span class="hst">  </span>there before me standing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Brave knights, your rest now leaving,<span class="hst">  </span>soon on the Norman shore must you be landing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“The air is fresh and gladsome,<span class="hst">  </span>the sky is broad and bright,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, well for us it happens,<span class="hst">  </span>the moon will shine to-night.</p>
			<p class="t0">From the sandy shore now hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>my warriors bold and daring:</p>
			<p class="t0">Before it dawns to-morrow,<span class="hst">  </span>we King Ludwig’s stronghold must be nearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then they all were busy,<span class="hst">  </span>when thus old Wâ-te spoke;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon their clothes and horses<span class="hst">  </span>on board the ships they took.</p>
			<p class="t0">All the night still sailing,<span class="hst">  </span>towards the land they hasted;</p>
			<p class="t0">And ere the morrow’s daylight,<span class="hst">  </span>before the castle, on the sands they rested.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hushed were all by Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>throughout the warlike band,</p>
			<p class="t0">As soon as they to rest them<span class="hst">  </span>lay down upon the sand.</p>
			<p class="t0">To his water-weary followers<span class="hst">  </span>leave for this was granted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their shields about them spreading,<span class="hst">  </span>on them they laid their heads, for sleep they wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Whoe’er to-morrow morning<span class="hst">  </span>hopes to gain the fight</p>
			<p class="t0">Must not,” said the aged Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>“oversleep to-night.</p>
			<p class="t0">For the struggle now before us<span class="hst">  </span>we hardly can be waiting;</p>
			<p class="t0">As soon as morning lightens,<span class="hst">  </span>then, good knights, the foe must we be meeting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Further I give you warning:<span class="hst">  </span>whoe’er my horn shall hear</p>
			<p class="t0">Along the seashore sounded,<span class="hst">  </span>soon as it meets his ear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Let him at once make ready<span class="hst">  </span>the foeman to be meeting.</p>
			<p class="t0">When I shall blow at daybreak,<span class="hst">  </span>no longer then may any there be waiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“When I again shall blow it,<span class="hst">  </span>let each to this give heed;</p>
			<p class="t0">Quickly let his saddle<span class="hst">  </span>be laid upon his steed.</p>
			<p class="t0">Let him then be waiting,<span class="hst">  </span>till I see ’tis daylight fully,</p>
			<p class="t0">And the time has come for the onset;<span class="hst">  </span>let none hang back, but meet the struggle truly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To do as Wâ-te bade them<span class="hst">  </span>their word they gladly gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">How many a lovely woman<span class="hst">  </span>did he of bliss bereave!</p>
			<p class="t0">For soon their dearest kindred<span class="hst">  </span>unto death were wounded,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who now were only waiting<span class="hst">  </span>until the horn in the early morning sounded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“When you, my friends and kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>thrice my horn shall hear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, seated on your horses,<span class="hst">  </span>must you your weapons wear;</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus must you, brave warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>wait, your steeds bestriding,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till me you see, well-weaponed,<span class="hst">  </span>under the fair Queen Hilda’s banner riding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now on the seashore weary<span class="hst">  </span>lay they, one and all;</p>
			<p class="t0">Very near were they resting<span class="hst">  </span>to old King Ludwig’s hall.</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ the night had fallen,<span class="hst">  </span>its towers they saw while waking;</p>
			<p class="t0">The brave and fearless warriors<span class="hst">  </span>in stillness lay, no sound or outcry making.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The early star of morning<span class="hst">  </span>now had risen high;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then came a lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>unto the window nigh.</p>
			<p class="t0">She there was gazing skyward,<span class="hst">  </span>to see when day was breaking,</p>
			<p class="t0">That she might bring the tidings,<span class="hst">  </span>and rich reward from fair Gu-drun be seeking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ere she long had waited,<span class="hst">  </span>there dawned on the maiden’s sight,</p>
			<p class="t0">With its wonted gleam on the waters,<span class="hst">  </span>the early morning light;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the sheen of helmets<span class="hst">  </span>and many shields there flittered:</p>
			<p class="t0">Foes had besieged the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>and all the sands below with weapons glittered.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Back then went the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>to where Gu-drun she found:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Arouse, my queenly lady,<span class="hst">  </span>wake from your slumber sound!</p>
			<p class="t0">The land is held by foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>who will these walls be storming;</p>
			<p class="t0">We have not been forgotten<span class="hst">  </span>by those at home; our friends come hither swarming.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the high-born lady,<span class="hst">  </span>quickly sprang from her bed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, hasting to the window,<span class="hst">  </span>to the maid her thanks she said.</p>
			<p class="t0">“For this good news you give me,<span class="hst">  </span>wealth shall you be earning.”</p>
			<p class="t0">After her heavy sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>now for her friends Gu-drun was sorely yearning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Rich sails were seen to flutter<span class="hst">  </span>near by upon the sea;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the high-born maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Ah, wellaway! Woe’s me!</p>
			<p class="t0">Would that I ne’er were living!”<span class="hst">  </span>the wretched one was sighing:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Many a doughty warrior<span class="hst">  </span>this day for me shall here in death be lying.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">While thus she was bewailing,<span class="hst">  </span>nearly all still slept;</p>
			<p class="t0">But soon was one heard shouting,<span class="hst">  </span>who guard for Ludwig kept:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Be up, you careless warriors!<span class="hst">  </span>your arms, your arms be taking!</p>
			<p class="t0">And you, my king of Normandy!<span class="hst">  </span>I fear that all too late you will be waking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">This the wicked Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>heard, as the warder cried;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, while fast he slumbered,<span class="hst">  </span>she left the old king’s side.</p>
			<p class="t0">Up to the roof of the castle<span class="hst">  </span>then at once she hastened;</p>
			<p class="t0">She thence saw many foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>and on her devilish heart great sorrow fastened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Back again she speeded<span class="hst">  </span>to where she found the king:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Awake, my lord, make ready<span class="hst">  </span>for guests who followers bring!</p>
			<p class="t0">Now hem they in your castle,<span class="hst">  </span>and well may they be dreaded:</p>
			<p class="t0">That smile of young Gu-drun<span class="hst">  </span>will cost your knights a strife as yet unheeded.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Hush!” then answered Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>“I will go myself to see;</p>
			<p class="t0">We must all be bravely waiting<span class="hst">  </span>for whatsoe’er may be.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then looked he from his castle,<span class="hst">  </span>to see the foemen thronging;</p>
			<p class="t0">His eyes by guests were greeted,<span class="hst">  </span>on whom to look he never might be longing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before his palace waving,<span class="hst">  </span>he saw their banners spread;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the old King Ludwig:<span class="hst">  </span>“Let some one go with speed</p>
			<p class="t0">And bear this news to Hartmut.<span class="hst">  </span>I for pilgrims take them,</p>
			<p class="t0">To sell their wares come hither;<span class="hst">  </span>before my hall a market would they make them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then they wakened Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>that he the tale might hear.</p>
			<p class="t0">Outspoke that daring warrior:<span class="hst">  </span>“Let none be sad or fear.</p>
			<p class="t0">I see full twenty princes<span class="hst">  </span>their blazoned banners bearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween these foes are coming<span class="hst">  </span>to wreak the hate they long ’gainst us are wearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c27">Tale the Twenty-Seventh.<br/><span class="small">HOW LUDWIG AND HARTMUT MET THE HEGELINGS.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Asleep still left he lying<span class="hst">  </span>all his faithful men.</p>
			<p class="t0">He and his father Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>the twain, to go were seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, gazing from the window,<span class="hst">  </span>they saw the throngs below them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Quickly then said Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Too near our castle-walls methinks they show them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I ween they are not pilgrims,<span class="hst">  </span>in truth, my father dear;</p>
			<p class="t0">More like it is that Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>and all his men draw near.</p>
			<p class="t0">He from Sturmland cometh,<span class="hst">  </span>the lord of Ortland bringing;</p>
			<p class="t0">The men I see are like them,<span class="hst">  </span>as I know from the flag that they to the breeze are flinging.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I see a brown silk pennon,<span class="hst">  </span>that comes from Karadé;</p>
			<p class="t0">Before that flag is lowered,<span class="hst">  </span>many will rue the day.</p>
			<p class="t0">On it a head is blazoned,—<span class="hst">  </span>as red as gold it glitters:</p>
			<p class="t0">Guests so bold and warlike<span class="hst">  </span>we well can spare; their sight the day embitters.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“The Moorland king is bringing<span class="hst">  </span>full twenty thousand men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Knights as strong and daring<span class="hst">  </span>as any I have seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">To win from us great honor<span class="hst">  </span>methinks they now are craving.</p>
			<p class="t0">There comes another banner,<span class="hst">  </span>that o’er yet other knights its folds is waving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“It is the flag of Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>the knight from the Danish land;</p>
			<p class="t0">I see with him Lord Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>I know both him and his band.</p>
			<p class="t0">And hither, too, from Waleis,<span class="hst">  </span>many foemen leading,</p>
			<p class="t0">Morunc now comes riding;<span class="hst">  </span>he, for the morning’s fight, o’er the sands is speeding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I see another banner,<span class="hst">  </span>on it a chevron red,</p>
			<p class="t0">With sharpened spears within it;<span class="hst">  </span>for this shall many bleed.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortwin it is who bears it,<span class="hst">  </span>from Ortland hither faring:</p>
			<p class="t0">Erewhile we slew his father;<span class="hst">  </span>no kindly thought to us he now is bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“There floats another banner,<span class="hst">  </span>whiter than any swan;</p>
			<p class="t0">Blazons bright and golden<span class="hst">  </span>you well may see thereon.</p>
			<p class="t0">It is our mother Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>who sends it o’er the water;</p>
			<p class="t0">The hatred of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>will soon be known by me who stole her daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“There I see uplifted<span class="hst">  </span>a flag outspreading wide;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of sky-blue silk ’tis woven.<span class="hst">  </span>The truth I will not hide;</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic bears this banner,<span class="hst">  </span>he in the Sealands dwelling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Sea-leaves are shown upon it;<span class="hst">  </span>he soon on us his wrath will here be telling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“There Irold, too, is coming,—<span class="hst">  </span>this that I say is true,—</p>
			<p class="t0">From Friesland leading many,<span class="hst">  </span>as well indeed I know,</p>
			<p class="t0">With fighting men from Holstein,<span class="hst">  </span>warriors brave and daring.</p>
			<p class="t0">A stormy fight is nearing;<span class="hst">  </span>now in our castle all must arms be wearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then cried Hartmut loudly:<span class="hst">  </span>“Up, my faithful men!</p>
			<p class="t0">If to these guests so warlike,<span class="hst">  </span>who ’neath our walls are seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">It may not now be granted<span class="hst">  </span>to ride so boldly near us,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, before the gateway,<span class="hst">  </span>with sword-blows we must greet them, and bravely bear us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then from their beds upsprang they<span class="hst">  </span>all who yet did lie;</p>
			<p class="t0">At once, to bring their war-gear,<span class="hst">  </span>loudly did they cry.</p>
			<p class="t0">The call to guard their master<span class="hst">  </span>gladly they were hearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Forty hundred warriors<span class="hst">  </span>showed themselves, their shining armor wearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig and Hartmut with him<span class="hst">  </span>armed themselves for fight:</p>
			<p class="t0">To the sad and homeless maidens<span class="hst">  </span>this was a sorry sight;</p>
			<p class="t0">These within the castle<span class="hst">  </span>uneasy hearts were keeping;</p>
			<p class="t0">They said to one another:<span class="hst">  </span>“Let him who smiled before this day be weeping!”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quickly came Queen Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>old King Ludwig’s wife;</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “What will you, Hartmut?<span class="hst">  </span>Would you lose your life,</p>
			<p class="t0">With that of all your kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>who here our lot are sharing?</p>
			<p class="t0">The foe will surely slay you,<span class="hst">  </span>if to leave the castle-walls you now be daring.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The well-born knight then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Mother, stay within;</p>
			<p class="t0">You may not give your teaching<span class="hst">  </span>to me or to my men.</p>
			<p class="t0">Spare your words for women;<span class="hst">  </span>they mayhap will listen,</p>
			<p class="t0">While they sit at sewing,<span class="hst">  </span>making their silks with gold and gems to glisten.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Now, mother, let us see you<span class="hst">  </span>send Gu-drun to wash,</p>
			<p class="t0">As you did before, with her maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>where the billows dash.</p>
			<p class="t0">You weened they all were friendless,<span class="hst">  </span>and had no kindred living;</p>
			<p class="t0">You yet may see, ere nightfall,<span class="hst">  </span>what thanks to us our guests will yet be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake his devilish mother:<span class="hst">  </span>“I did it for your sake,</p>
			<p class="t0">Thinking her will to bridle.<span class="hst">  </span>My bidding kindly take;</p>
			<p class="t0">Strongly built is the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>let now the gates be fastened;</p>
			<p class="t0">They then will gain but little<span class="hst">  </span>who on their toilsome way have hither hastened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Full well you know it, Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>you bear the maiden’s hate,</p>
			<p class="t0">For you have slain her kinsmen:<span class="hst">  </span>your watch you must not bate.</p>
			<p class="t0">It is not friends or kinsfolk<span class="hst">  </span>who at our gates are knocking;</p>
			<p class="t0">The proud and warlike Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>twenty to one of us, come hither flocking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Of this bethink you further,<span class="hst">  </span>my well-belovéd son:</p>
			<p class="t0">Bread we have in the castle<span class="hst">  </span>and wine for every one;</p>
			<p class="t0">Food will not be lacking<span class="hst">  </span>if here for a year we are staying;</p>
			<p class="t0">But if on the field you are taken,<span class="hst">  </span>our foes will you from bondage ne’er be freeing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to him spake further<span class="hst">  </span>old King Ludwig’s wife:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Ever guard your honor,<span class="hst">  </span>but do not lose your life.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bid men to shoot with longbows<span class="hst">  </span>at the loop-holes standing;</p>
			<p class="t0">So shall wounds be given,<span class="hst">  </span>for which their friends at home will tears be spending.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Let slings with ropes be fitted;<span class="hst">  </span>we then will meet the foe</p>
			<p class="t0">By hurling rocks upon them:<span class="hst">  </span>knights we have enow.</p>
			<p class="t0">Before with these new-comers<span class="hst">  </span>you your swords are crossing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Stones will I and my maidens<span class="hst">  </span>bring in aprons white, on them to be tossing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Angrily spake Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“Lady, get you gone!</p>
			<p class="t0">Why do you seek to lead me?<span class="hst">  </span>Is not my mind my own?</p>
			<p class="t0">Before my foes shall find me<span class="hst">  </span>within my castle hiding,</p>
			<p class="t0">Outside I would die far sooner,<span class="hst">  </span>in fight with Hilda’s men, against me riding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to him said, weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>old King Ludwig’s wife:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I gave to you this warning<span class="hst">  </span>that you might spare your life,</p>
			<p class="t0">And guard yourself the better.<span class="hst">  </span>Whoe’er is seen this morning</p>
			<p class="t0">Beneath your banner fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>rich gifts from us shall he be fairly earning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Now arm ourselves,” cried Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>“stand by my son in fight;</p>
			<p class="t0">Strike from your foemen’s helmets<span class="hst">  </span>a glowing, fiery light.</p>
			<p class="t0">Be always near your master,<span class="hst">  </span>to help him ever striving;</p>
			<p class="t0">Fitly these guests to welcome,<span class="hst">  </span>deep be the wounds that you to them are giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to his men said Hartmut:<span class="hst">  </span>“My mother’s words are true;</p>
			<p class="t0">If you to me are faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>and strive your best to do,</p>
			<p class="t0">And this day, in the struggle,<span class="hst">  </span>to give your help are ready,</p>
			<p class="t0">When fathers shall have fallen,<span class="hst">  </span>a friend I’ll be to sons bereft and needy.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A thousand and a hundred<span class="hst">  </span>within King Ludwig’s halls</p>
			<p class="t0">Now were all well-weaponed.<span class="hst">  </span>Before from out the walls</p>
			<p class="t0">Went any thro’ the gateways,<span class="hst">  </span>they left the stronghold guarded;</p>
			<p class="t0">Still within it posted,<span class="hst">  </span>five hundred warriors brave the castle warded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On four gates of the castle<span class="hst">  </span>the bolts were backward thrown:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er had they been opened<span class="hst">  </span>to a single spur alone.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then with the youthful Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>outgoing at his bidding,</p>
			<p class="t0">All with helmets fastened,<span class="hst">  </span>went thirty hundred followers boldly riding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The hour of strife drew nearer.<span class="hst">  </span>He of the Sturmisch land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, his horn was blowing;<span class="hst">  </span>and loud across the sand,</p>
			<p class="t0">For thirty miles or over,<span class="hst">  </span>men the blast were hearing;</p>
			<p class="t0">The fighters of the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>to flock to Hilda’s flag, their arms were wearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Once again he blew it:<span class="hst">  </span>at this should all take heed,</p>
			<p class="t0">That every knight among them<span class="hst">  </span>then should mount his steed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And each his men should gather<span class="hst">  </span>to ride as they were bidden.</p>
			<p class="t0">A knight so old as Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>and yet so brave, to the fight had never ridden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The third time that he blew it,<span class="hst">  </span>he such a blast did make</p>
			<p class="t0">That all the land was shaken,<span class="hst">  </span>and the sea a sound gave back;</p>
			<p class="t0">Almost from Ludwig’s castle<span class="hst">  </span>the corner-stones were falling:</p>
			<p class="t0">To raise Queen Hilda’s banner<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te to Horant then was loudly calling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They feared old Wâ-te sorely,<span class="hst">  </span>none dared to speak aloud;</p>
			<p class="t0">A horse was e’en heard neighing.<span class="hst">  </span>Upon the roof now stood</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic’s well-belovéd,<span class="hst">  </span>and saw the warriors daring,</p>
			<p class="t0">Onward proudly riding,<span class="hst">  </span>to wage the fight with Hartmut, nothing fearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut rode to meet them;<span class="hst">  </span>he and all his men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Bearing well their weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>to leave the gates were seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those from the windows gazing<span class="hst">  </span>saw the helmets glisten</p>
			<p class="t0">Of friends as well as foemen.<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut not alone to the fight did hasten.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To all four sides of the castle<span class="hst">  </span>the foes their banners bore;</p>
			<p class="t0">Bright in hue like silver<span class="hst">  </span>was the armor that they wore;</p>
			<p class="t0">The bosses of their bucklers<span class="hst">  </span>were seen to glitter brightly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Much was Wâ-te dreaded;<span class="hst">  </span>no lion grim and wild were feared more rightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The fighters from the Moorland<span class="hst">  </span>were seen apart to ride,</p>
			<p class="t0">And heavy shafts were hurling;<span class="hst">  </span>splinters were scattered wide.</p>
			<p class="t0">When with the Norman foemen<span class="hst">  </span>soon the fight did thicken,</p>
			<p class="t0">Sharply from their weapons<span class="hst">  </span>and from their breastplates fiery sparks were stricken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The warriors from Denmark<span class="hst">  </span>near to the castle rode.</p>
			<p class="t0">There the mighty Irold<span class="hst">  </span>six thousand fighters good</p>
			<p class="t0">Up to the walls was leading,<span class="hst">  </span>an onslaught to be making:</p>
			<p class="t0">Brave and daring were they;<span class="hst">  </span>sore ill from them erelong was Ludwig taking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Elsewhere, riding boldly,<span class="hst">  </span>Ortwin his followers led,</p>
			<p class="t0">No less than eighty hundred;<span class="hst">  </span>sorrow and woe they made</p>
			<p class="t0">For many of the Normans,<span class="hst">  </span>and all the land they harried.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gerlind and Ortrun weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>watching the fight from the roof, together tarried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then came Herwic also,<span class="hst">  </span>betrothed to fair Gu-drun;</p>
			<p class="t0">Through him full many a woman<span class="hst">  </span>must come to sorrow soon,</p>
			<p class="t0">When, for his heart’s belovéd,<span class="hst">  </span>he to the fight was springing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Beneath the heavy weapons<span class="hst">  </span>were heard the clattering helmets loudly ringing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now came the aged Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>with warriors not a few;</p>
			<p class="t0">Grim was he and fearless,<span class="hst">  </span>as soon they all well knew.</p>
			<p class="t0">His spear not yet he lowered<span class="hst">  </span>as he to the walls came riding:</p>
			<p class="t0">Sad was the sight to Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>but other were the thoughts Gu-drun was hiding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then came the Norman Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>riding before his men.</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en had he been Kaiser,<span class="hst">  </span>never would he be seen</p>
			<p class="t0">To bear himself more proudly.<span class="hst">  </span>In the sun was seen to glisten</p>
			<p class="t0">All his shining armor.<span class="hst">  </span>His boldness on the field not yet did lessen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he was seen by Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>the lord of Ortland’s throne,</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Will any tell us,<span class="hst">  </span>to whom this knight is known,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who is the daring fighter<span class="hst">  </span>now against us turning?</p>
			<p class="t0">He shows as bold a bearing<span class="hst">  </span>as if to win a kingdom he were yearning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said one among them:<span class="hst">  </span>“’Tis Hartmut whom you see;</p>
			<p class="t0">There indeed is a warrior!<span class="hst">  </span>a daring knight is he.</p>
			<p class="t0">The selfsame foeman is he<span class="hst">  </span>who erstwhile slew your father.</p>
			<p class="t0">Where’er the strife is raging,<span class="hst">  </span>a bolder man than he there’s not another.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Angrily spake Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“Me for his wrongs he owes,</p>
			<p class="t0">And must atone full dearly<span class="hst">  </span>before from here he goes.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ills that he has done us<span class="hst">  </span>must he be soon undoing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gerlind cannot help him<span class="hst">  </span>that he from hence may e’er alive be going.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Down upon young Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut riding bore.</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ he did not know him,<span class="hst">  </span>deep he plunged his spur;</p>
			<p class="t0">His horse sprang forward widely,<span class="hst">  </span>against brave Ortwin driven.</p>
			<p class="t0">Both their spears were lowered;<span class="hst">  </span>fire on their armor flashed from spear-strokes given.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">No thrust against the other<span class="hst">  </span>did either leave undone:</p>
			<p class="t0">The war-horse then of Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>was on his haunches thrown;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon, too, the steed did stagger<span class="hst">  </span>whereon was Hartmut seated;</p>
			<p class="t0">They could not bear the onset<span class="hst">  </span>of kings who rushed together, to madness heated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">High upreared the horses;<span class="hst">  </span>a mighty clang arose</p>
			<p class="t0">From clash of kingly sword-blades.<span class="hst">  </span>Thanks were due to those</p>
			<p class="t0">Who the fight thus opened,<span class="hst">  </span>as knights beseemeth ever.</p>
			<p class="t0">Brave were both and fearless;<span class="hst">  </span>to shrink from one another thought they never.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">On both sides came their followers,<span class="hst">  </span>lowering their spears,</p>
			<p class="t0">And bringing death to many;<span class="hst">  </span>each his foeman nears,</p>
			<p class="t0">And in the shock of the onset<span class="hst">  </span>heavy wounds was giving.</p>
			<p class="t0">All of them were faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>and well for a worthy name they now were striving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A thousand ’gainst a thousand,<span class="hst">  </span>now the strife began</p>
			<p class="t0">Of Hartmut’s men with Wâ-te’s,<span class="hst">  </span>each man against his man.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon by the lord of Sturmland<span class="hst">  </span>were they so badly treated</p>
			<p class="t0">That whoso now came near him<span class="hst">  </span>never a second time with him was mated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now were thickly mingled<span class="hst">  </span>of foes ten thousand men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Among King Herwic’s warriors;<span class="hst">  </span>they came in anger keen.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their mood it was so stubborn<span class="hst">  </span>that rather than be flying</p>
			<p class="t0">Far from the field of fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>they on the ground would first in death be lying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A knight indeed was Herwic;<span class="hst">  </span>what daring deeds he did!</p>
			<p class="t0">Earnest was he in fighting,<span class="hst">  </span>that so the lovely maid</p>
			<p class="t0">Might be to him the kinder.<span class="hst">  </span>But how could he be dreaming</p>
			<p class="t0">The boon could e’er befall him,<span class="hst">  </span>that the eyes of fair Gu-drun on him were beaming?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig, king of the Normans,<span class="hst">  </span>and they of the Danish land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Now had met together.<span class="hst">  </span>Ludwig bore in hand</p>
			<p class="t0">His strong and heavy weapon;<span class="hst">  </span>lordly was his bearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet he with all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>to come too far without the walls was daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There, with his men from Holstein,<span class="hst">  </span>Fru-te, brave and bold,</p>
			<p class="t0">Slew full many a foeman;<span class="hst">  </span>of this could much be told.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now, too, from the land of Waleis,<span class="hst">  </span>Morunc, many slaying,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before King Ludwig’s castle<span class="hst">  </span>made rich the earth with the dead he low was laying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold, the youthful champion,<span class="hst">  </span>a knight both true and good,</p>
			<p class="t0">Slashed thro’ foemen’s armor,<span class="hst">  </span>shedding their hot life-blood.</p>
			<p class="t0">Under Hilda’s banner<span class="hst">  </span>was Wâ-te’s kinsman fighting;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many in death grew paler<span class="hst">  </span>as Horant thinned the crowd he fast was smiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the young King Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>and Ortwin met again.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thicker then than snow-flakes<span class="hst">  </span>blown by the wind are seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">The sword-strokes of the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>upon each other lighted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus it was that Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>once more by Ortwin on the field was greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun’s young brother, Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>was bold and brave enow,</p>
			<p class="t0">But Hartmut through his helmet<span class="hst">  </span>smote him a heavy blow;</p>
			<p class="t0">Over his shining breastplate<span class="hst">  </span>soon the blood was streaming:</p>
			<p class="t0">The followers of Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>sadly saw the flow, its brightness dimming.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Great was the crush and uproar;<span class="hst">  </span>hand to hand they fought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many wounds were gaping<span class="hst">  </span>thro’ rings of steel well-wrought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many a head had fallen<span class="hst">  </span>beneath the sword-strokes given:</p>
			<p class="t0">Death was like a robber,<span class="hst">  </span>that from their kin the dearest friends had riven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now saw the Danish Horant<span class="hst">  </span>that Ortwin from his foe</p>
			<p class="t0">A bloody wound had taken;<span class="hst">  </span>then Horant bade them show</p>
			<p class="t0">Who ’twas that thus had wounded<span class="hst">  </span>his master loved so dearly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut at this was laughing,<span class="hst">  </span>for both upon the field had met too nearly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortwin himself then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“’Tis Hartmut this has done.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Hilda’s banner was given<span class="hst">  </span>by Horant to one of his own;</p>
			<p class="t0">Thinking thus the foeman<span class="hst">  </span>he could harm the better,</p>
			<p class="t0">And gain himself much honor:<span class="hst">  </span>now he sought his foe with boldness greater.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut heard around him<span class="hst">  </span>a loud and stormy din.</p>
			<p class="t0">On many of his warriors<span class="hst">  </span>streams of blood were seen</p>
			<p class="t0">Fast from wounds out-welling;<span class="hst">  </span>down to their feet ’twas flowing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then cried Hartmut boldly:<span class="hst">  </span>“For this shall you atone, and this be ruing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now he turned him quickly<span class="hst">  </span>where Horant met his sight;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then might one be seeing,<span class="hst">  </span>so brave were both in fight,</p>
			<p class="t0">How from their ringed armor<span class="hst">  </span>sparks of fire were flying;</p>
			<p class="t0">Blunted were the sword-blades<span class="hst">  </span>which they on each other’s helmets fast were plying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut wounded Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>even as he had done</p>
			<p class="t0">Not long before to Ortwin;<span class="hst">  </span>a ruddy stream full soon</p>
			<p class="t0">Ran from out his armor,<span class="hst">  </span>at Hartmut’s hand forth welling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Strong indeed was his foeman;<span class="hst">  </span>who now to win his lands could hope be feeling?</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then in bitter struggle<span class="hst">  </span>many, on either side,</p>
			<p class="t0">Saw their bucklers shattered,<span class="hst">  </span>tho’ strong and often tried;</p>
			<p class="t0">Beaten were they and broken<span class="hst">  </span>by sword-strokes quickly given</p>
			<p class="t0">By each upon the other.<span class="hst">  </span>Well to guard himself had Hartmut striven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the friends of Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>and those of Horant, too,</p>
			<p class="t0">Away from the field did lead them;<span class="hst">  </span>and care did they bestow</p>
			<p class="t0">To bind their wounds wide-gaping;<span class="hst">  </span>no time for this they wasted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then again to the war-field<span class="hst">  </span>the knights both rode; once more to the strife they hasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">We now must leave them fighting<span class="hst">  </span>as bravely as they will.</p>
			<p class="t0">Who the day was winning,<span class="hst">  </span>or whom his foe did kill,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before King Ludwig’s castle,<span class="hst">  </span>none could yet be saying.</p>
			<p class="t0">Grimly strove the Normans;<span class="hst">  </span>their foes, not less, for fame were strength outlaying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of all that there befell them<span class="hst">  </span>none may ever tell;</p>
			<p class="t0">But ’tis not yet forgotten<span class="hst">  </span>that many a knight there fell.</p>
			<p class="t0">On every side were sword-blades<span class="hst">  </span>heard together ringing;</p>
			<p class="t0">Foemen all were mingled,<span class="hst">  </span>the slow with those who quick in fight were springing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te stood not idle,<span class="hst">  </span>that can I well believe.</p>
			<p class="t0">He bade farewell to many,<span class="hst">  </span>nor longer let them live;</p>
			<p class="t0">Cut down by him in the struggle,<span class="hst">  </span>were they before him lying.</p>
			<p class="t0">Fain were Hartmut’s kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>to wreak their wrath for friends who there were dying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now came Herwic nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>so the tale is told,</p>
			<p class="t0">And led against King Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>many a champion bold.</p>
			<p class="t0">He saw that aged warrior<span class="hst">  </span>his weapons bravely bearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where he with all his liegemen,<span class="hst">  </span>a wondrous host of foes beat down, unsparing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic called out loudly:<span class="hst">  </span>“Can any one now tell</p>
			<p class="t0">Who is that fighting graybeard,<span class="hst">  </span>who all his foes doth fell?</p>
			<p class="t0">Deepest wounds for many<span class="hst">  </span>there his hand is hewing,</p>
			<p class="t0">With bravery so fearless:<span class="hst">  </span>women in tears will this erelong be ruing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When this was heard by Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>outspoke that Norman foe:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Who in the midst of battle<span class="hst">  </span>seeks my name to know?</p>
			<p class="t0">I bear the name of Ludwig:<span class="hst">  </span>for Normandy I’m fighting;</p>
			<p class="t0">Could I but meet my foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>them indeed would I be sorely smiting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake to him King Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“This thou well dost earn:</p>
			<p class="t0">Seeing thou art Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>with hate for thee I burn.</p>
			<p class="t0">For us, upon the sand-drifts,<span class="hst">  </span>many knights thou wast slaying:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thou slewest Hettel also;<span class="hst">  </span>a warrior brave was he, beyond all saying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Still further thou hast wronged us,<span class="hst">  </span>before thy day was done:</p>
			<p class="t0">For this we still are mourning.<span class="hst">  </span>I for my loss have known</p>
			<p class="t0">Heart-heaviness and sorrow:<span class="hst">  </span>thou hast my lady stolen</p>
			<p class="t0">From me upon the Wulpensand;<span class="hst">  </span>and many knights for her in death have fallen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I bear the name of Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>thou hast taken my hoped-for wife,</p>
			<p class="t0">And again to me must give her;<span class="hst">  </span>else to give his life,</p>
			<p class="t0">With that of many a liegeman,<span class="hst">  </span>must one of us be willing.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then King Ludwig answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Too boldly thou in my land in threats art dealing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Thy name, and this thy warning,<span class="hst">  </span>thou hast no need to tell;</p>
			<p class="t0">There yet are many others<span class="hst">  </span>from whom I took, as well,</p>
			<p class="t0">Their goods and eke their kinsmen.<span class="hst">  </span>To trust my word be ready,</p>
			<p class="t0">In this I will not falter;<span class="hst">  </span>thou nevermore may’st hope to kiss thy lady.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they thus had spoken,<span class="hst">  </span>the kings no more did rest,</p>
			<p class="t0">But sprang upon each other.<span class="hst">  </span>If either got the best,</p>
			<p class="t0">To hold it was not easy;<span class="hst">  </span>youths were forward pushing</p>
			<p class="t0">Under both the standards,<span class="hst">  </span>and daring knights to help their lords were rushing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A fearless king was Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>and long and bravely fought;</p>
			<p class="t0">But quickly Hartmut’s father<span class="hst">  </span>the youthful Herwic smote,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till he began to stagger<span class="hst">  </span>’neath blows by Ludwig given,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who gladly would have slain him,<span class="hst">  </span>or would from out his lands his foe have driven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">If Herwic’s faithful followers<span class="hst">  </span>so near him had not been,</p>
			<p class="t0">And given help so quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>never could he, I ween,</p>
			<p class="t0">Have freed himself from Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>or left the field yet living;</p>
			<p class="t0">So well that aged warrior<span class="hst">  </span>to make young Herwic dread him now was striving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">But help to him was granted,<span class="hst">  </span>his life he did not lose;</p>
			<p class="t0">And, neither stunned nor wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>he from his fall arose.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to the roof quick turning,<span class="hst">  </span>his eyes he now was raising,</p>
			<p class="t0">To see if, ’mongst the ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>his heart’s beloved had on his fall been gazing.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c28">Tale the Twenty-Eighth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HERWIC SLEW LUDWIG.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now said Herwic sadly:<span class="hst">  </span>“Ah, welaway! Woe’s me!</p>
			<p class="t0">If fair Gu-drun, my lady,<span class="hst">  </span>my fall did lately see.</p>
			<p class="t0">Should e’er the hour be coming<span class="hst">  </span>when I shall clasp the maiden,</p>
			<p class="t0">And as a wife shall own her,<span class="hst">  </span>with blame and scorn shall I by her be laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Sorely doth it shame me,<span class="hst">  </span>that now the gray old man</p>
			<p class="t0">Thus has overthrown me.”<span class="hst">  </span>Forthwith he bade again</p>
			<p class="t0">His men to raise his banner,<span class="hst">  </span>and ’gainst King Ludwig bear it;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then rushed they on the foemen,<span class="hst">  </span>who might not flee the fight, but all must share it.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig heard behind him<span class="hst">  </span>an uproar loud and din;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he turned him quickly,<span class="hst">  </span>and Herwic sought again.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon he heard on helmets<span class="hst">  </span>many sword-blows stricken.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who stood near Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>well might dread the wrath that both did quicken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They sprang upon each other,<span class="hst">  </span>and fast and well they smote;</p>
			<p class="t0">Blows on blows loud sounded<span class="hst">  </span>the stormy field throughout.</p>
			<p class="t0">Who can tell how many<span class="hst">  </span>now in death were lying?</p>
			<p class="t0">The day was lost to Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>who there his strength with Herwic would be trying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon Gu-drun’s betrothéd<span class="hst">  </span>reached over Ludwig’s shield,</p>
			<p class="t0">And smote him ’neath his helmet;<span class="hst">  </span>well his sword did he wield.</p>
			<p class="t0">Him he sorely wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>and strength no more did leave him;</p>
			<p class="t0">Grim death he there awaited<span class="hst">  </span>until King Herwic should of life bereave him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Herwic with his broadsword<span class="hst">  </span>smote the king anew;</p>
			<p class="t0">At once the head of Ludwig<span class="hst">  </span>from off his shoulders flew.</p>
			<p class="t0">Well repaid was Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>for his shameful overthrowing;</p>
			<p class="t0">The king lay dead before him.<span class="hst">  </span>For this fair eyes must soon be overflowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ludwig’s faithful followers,<span class="hst">  </span>after their king was slain,</p>
			<p class="t0">His banner to the castle<span class="hst">  </span>thought to bear again;</p>
			<p class="t0">But all too far from the gateway<span class="hst">  </span>they had now been straying:</p>
			<p class="t0">From them the flag was taken,<span class="hst">  </span>and death must them erelong with their lord be laying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The watchman saw from the castle<span class="hst">  </span>how Ludwig lost his life;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then was heard the mourning<span class="hst">  </span>of knights and many a wife:</p>
			<p class="t0">Their king, so old and mighty,<span class="hst">  </span>they knew in death was lying;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun and all her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>stood in the hall in fear, and loud were crying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As yet the Norman Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>knew nothing of the tale,</p>
			<p class="t0">How that the king, his father,<span class="hst">  </span>and kinsmen young as well,</p>
			<p class="t0">With many bravest warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>now in death were sleeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then he heard from the castle<span class="hst">  </span>the shrieks and wails of those who there were weeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the knightly Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>unto his followers said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“’Tis best we hence withdraw us;<span class="hst">  </span>how many here lie dead</p>
			<p class="t0">Who in stormy fighting<span class="hst">  </span>thought our men to be slaying!</p>
			<p class="t0">Now will we seek the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>and there until a better time be staying.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him they listened gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and followed where he rode.</p>
			<p class="t0">Great was the work of slaughter<span class="hst">  </span>the field around them showed,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where with grimmest foemen<span class="hst">  </span>they were closely warring;</p>
			<p class="t0">Freely had blood been flowing<span class="hst">  </span>beneath the hand of Hartmut and his followers daring.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“So well,” he said, “have you helped me,<span class="hst">  </span>who my kinsmen are,</p>
			<p class="t0">That all my lands and riches<span class="hst">  </span>gladly with you I’ll share.</p>
			<p class="t0">We now will ride to my castle,<span class="hst">  </span>and there to rest betake us;</p>
			<p class="t0">Men the gates will open,<span class="hst">  </span>and wine for us will pour, and mead will make us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Fallen knights full many<span class="hst">  </span>they left on the field behind:</p>
			<p class="t0">Were these of the land the owners,<span class="hst">  </span>still with no braver mind</p>
			<p class="t0">They then had met the onset.<span class="hst">  </span>Those for the gates now striving,</p>
			<p class="t0">By Wâ-te and his thousand<span class="hst">  </span>were not allowed to reach the castle living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He with a host of fighters<span class="hst">  </span>near the gates was seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">When Hartmut with his followers<span class="hst">  </span>sought to come within;</p>
			<p class="t0">They in this were baffled,<span class="hst">  </span>and their strength were wasting.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who the castle guarded<span class="hst">  </span>heavy stones from off the wall were casting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They hurled them down so wildly<span class="hst">  </span>on Wâ-te and his men,</p>
			<p class="t0">Like hailstones they were falling,<span class="hst">  </span>with not a stop between.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te recked but little<span class="hst">  </span>how many were dead or living,</p>
			<p class="t0">Might he the day be gaining;<span class="hst">  </span>to this alone his thoughts he now was giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut saw old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>before the castle-gate.</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Tho’ from our foemen<span class="hst">  </span>our gains this day are great,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before it shall be ended,<span class="hst">  </span>for this their hate they’ll show us:</p>
			<p class="t0">Let now the strong be heedful;<span class="hst">  </span>dead must many lie on the field below us.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Fear and care it gives me<span class="hst">  </span>that many here are seen</p>
			<p class="t0">Whom we must now be meeting.<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te with all his men</p>
			<p class="t0">I see before the gateway,<span class="hst">  </span>there with sword-strokes hewing.</p>
			<p class="t0">If he of the gate be keeper,<span class="hst">  </span>I look for little kindness he’ll be doing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“See for yourselves, my warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>the gateways and the walls</p>
			<p class="t0">By foes on all sides girded;<span class="hst">  </span>knight to knight there calls.</p>
			<p class="t0">The roadways all are crowded,<span class="hst">  </span>whichever way we’re turning:</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun’s good friends and champions<span class="hst">  </span>will spare no toil; to win the day they’re burning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“That you may know too truly,<span class="hst">  </span>as I see already well;</p>
			<p class="t0">Friends we must lose full many.<span class="hst">  </span>Howe’er it so befell,</p>
			<p class="t0">Before the outer gateway<span class="hst">  </span>already see I waving</p>
			<p class="t0">The Moorland foeman’s banner;<span class="hst">  </span>lest they get in, a care must you be having.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Near to the second gateway<span class="hst">  </span>I see yet other foes:</p>
			<p class="t0">I saw Lord Ortwin’s banner,<span class="hst">  </span>as on the breeze it rose.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun’s young brother is he;<span class="hst">  </span>fair women’s smiles he’s seeking:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere he shall cool his anger,<span class="hst">  </span>beneath his blows will helmets yet be breaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Now see I, too, brave Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>before the third gate there;</p>
			<p class="t0">With him seven thousand followers<span class="hst">  </span>upon the field are near.</p>
			<p class="t0">He comes in guise most knightly,<span class="hst">  </span>to win his own heart’s lady;</p>
			<p class="t0">On him are gazing gladly<span class="hst">  </span>the fair Gu-drun, and many maids already.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“To hasten back to my castle,<span class="hst">  </span>the thought too late has come.</p>
			<p class="t0">I know not where, with my warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>now to seek a home.</p>
			<p class="t0">I see the stern old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>before the fourth gate fighting;</p>
			<p class="t0">My many friends in the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>I fear indeed must long for us be waiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Fly from here I cannot;<span class="hst">  </span>no wings for this have I;</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor in the earth can hide me,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever else I try.</p>
			<p class="t0">Neither from the foeman<span class="hst">  </span>to the waves can we be turning:</p>
			<p class="t0">Now, in our lot so wretched,<span class="hst">  </span>what best it is to do from me be learning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Good knights of mine, now hearken;<span class="hst">  </span>there’s nothing left to do</p>
			<p class="t0">But, to the ground alighting,<span class="hst">  </span>their hot life’s-blood to hew</p>
			<p class="t0">From out the ringed armor:<span class="hst">  </span>fear not the word I’ve given.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, from their saddles leaping,<span class="hst">  </span>their horses back at once from them were driven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Now on, brave knights and warriors!”<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut called to all;</p>
			<p class="t0">“To the castle-gates press nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>whatever may befall.</p>
			<p class="t0">I yet must meet old Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>whether I live or am dying;</p>
			<p class="t0">To drive him from the gateway,<span class="hst">  </span>and from the walls, I will at least be trying.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon, with swords uplifted,<span class="hst">  </span>rushing on were seen</p>
			<p class="t0">The brave and youthful Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and with him all his men.</p>
			<p class="t0">He fell upon grim Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>who met his coming gladly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now their sword-blades clattered,<span class="hst">  </span>and many knights lay dead, or wounded badly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When Wâ-te saw young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>the onslaught on him make,</p>
			<p class="t0">While Fru-te bore the banner,<span class="hst">  </span>in wrath old Wâ-te spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I hear the swords loud ringing<span class="hst">  </span>of many pressing near us;</p>
			<p class="t0">I beg, dear cousin Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>let none come out from the gates; from that now spare us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Wâ-te, wild with anger,<span class="hst">  </span>did on King Hartmut run;</p>
			<p class="t0">But he, so brave and daring,<span class="hst">  </span>the onset would not shun.</p>
			<p class="t0">The sun with dust was darkened,<span class="hst">  </span>now from the struggle rising:</p>
			<p class="t0">Their strength was unabated;<span class="hst">  </span>still for good name they fought, that both were prizing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">What helped it that of Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>men said he was as strong</p>
			<p class="t0">As six and twenty warriors?<span class="hst">  </span>Though this was on each tongue,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet still to him young Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>his knightly skill was showing:</p>
			<p class="t0">Howe’er his foe was striving,<span class="hst">  </span>the Norman lord and his men no less were doing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A knight he was most truly,<span class="hst">  </span>and well indeed he fought;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the dead there lay a mountain<span class="hst">  </span>whom on the field he smote.</p>
			<p class="t0">It was, forsooth, a wonder<span class="hst">  </span>that Hartmut had not yielded,</p>
			<p class="t0">And died before old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>grim was the wrath from which himself he shielded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon heard he, loudly shrieking,<span class="hst">  </span>old King Ludwig’s wife;</p>
			<p class="t0">Sorely she was mourning<span class="hst">  </span>the loss of her husband’s life.</p>
			<p class="t0">She said she would reward him<span class="hst">  </span>who felt his death past bearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">And would Gu-drun be slaying,<span class="hst">  </span>with all the maids who there her lot were sharing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then ran a worthless fellow,<span class="hst">  </span>to whom the fee was dear,</p>
			<p class="t0">To where the Hegeling maidens<span class="hst">  </span>sat together near.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the hearts of the women<span class="hst">  </span>with many fears he loaded;</p>
			<p class="t0">For the sake of gold to be given,<span class="hst">  </span>to take their lives he now was sharply goaded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When that Hilda’s daughter<span class="hst">  </span>against her saw him bear</p>
			<p class="t0">A sharp and naked weapon,<span class="hst">  </span>she well indeed might fear,</p>
			<p class="t0">And mourn that, far from kindred,<span class="hst">  </span>she was thus forsaken.</p>
			<p class="t0">Had not young Hartmut seen it,<span class="hst">  </span>the knave her head from her would then have taken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She so forgot her breeding<span class="hst">  </span>that now she screamed aloud,</p>
			<p class="t0">As if in dread of dying;<span class="hst">  </span>great fear made wild her mood.</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas the same with all her maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>there beside her seated,</p>
			<p class="t0">From out the window gazing;<span class="hst">  </span>the ladies such behavior ill befitted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At once the sound of her wailing<span class="hst">  </span>to Hartmut made her known;</p>
			<p class="t0">And greatly did he wonder<span class="hst">  </span>what made her scream and moan.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon he saw a ruffian<span class="hst">  </span>whose sword was near to falling,</p>
			<p class="t0">As if he meant to kill her.<span class="hst">  </span>Loudly now to him ’gan Hartmut calling:</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Who are you, low-born dastard?<span class="hst">  </span>For what reward or need</p>
			<p class="t0">Do you affright these maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>and seek to strike them dead?</p>
			<p class="t0">If you shall strike one lady,<span class="hst">  </span>I give you now this warning,</p>
			<p class="t0">Your life shall quick be ended;<span class="hst">  </span>your kinsmen too shall hang, this very morning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Back then sprang the rascal,—<span class="hst">  </span>his anger he did fear;</p>
			<p class="t0">For now the youthful Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>held his life not dear,</p>
			<p class="t0">When to the homeless maidens<span class="hst">  </span>he his help was giving:</p>
			<p class="t0">With care was he o’erladen,<span class="hst">  </span>while from grim death to free them he was striving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quickly then came Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>she of Norman lands,</p>
			<p class="t0">The fair and youthful princess;<span class="hst">  </span>in woe she wrung her hands.</p>
			<p class="t0">She to Gu-drun came nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>the stately, high-born maiden,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, at her feet down-falling,<span class="hst">  </span>bewept her father’s death, with sorrow laden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “Most queenly lady,<span class="hst">  </span>do not your tears forbear,</p>
			<p class="t0">For all my many kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>who death together share.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bethink you, if you also<span class="hst">  </span>a father slain were weeping,</p>
			<p class="t0">How you would feel, great princess.<span class="hst">  </span>My father slain I mourn, in death now sleeping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Behold, most high-born maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>my woe and bitter need;</p>
			<p class="t0">How almost all my kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>lie, with my father, dead:</p>
			<p class="t0">And now the knightly Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>is death from Wâ-te fearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">If I should lose my brother,<span class="hst">  </span>bereft of kindred, nought could life be cheering.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Reward the love I’ve shown you,”<span class="hst">  </span>said the Norman maid.</p>
			<p class="t0">“Of all that saw your sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>when none a tear did shed,</p>
			<p class="t0">I then alone was friendly,<span class="hst">  </span>and had you in my keeping;</p>
			<p class="t0">For all the wrongs they did you,<span class="hst">  </span>I the livelong day for you was weeping.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda’s daughter answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Thou wast indeed my friend;</p>
			<p class="t0">But yet this strife so deadly<span class="hst">  </span>I know not how to end.</p>
			<p class="t0">Were I indeed a warrior,<span class="hst">  </span>and knightly weapons wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">I’d stop the fighting gladly;<span class="hst">  </span>and none to slay your brother then were daring.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortrun was sorely weeping;<span class="hst">  </span>she still the maid besought,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until within the window<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun at length she brought,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who with her hand then beckoned,<span class="hst">  </span>and begged that it be told her</p>
			<p class="t0">If from the land of her fathers<span class="hst">  </span>knights had come who did in friendship hold her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the knightly Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>answer thus did make:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Who are you, young maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>who news from us do seek?</p>
			<p class="t0">We are not the Hegelings,<span class="hst">  </span>whom you see so near you;</p>
			<p class="t0">We hither come from the Sealands.<span class="hst">  </span>Tell us, maiden, how we now can cheer you?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This do I beseech you,”<span class="hst">  </span>said the queenly maid:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Sore has been the fighting;<span class="hst">  </span>him will I thank, indeed,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who now cuts short the struggle.<span class="hst">  </span>Me will he be cheering</p>
			<p class="t0">Who from the hands of Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>will Hartmut free in the strife that I am fearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then asked the well-bred warrior<span class="hst">  </span>who from the Sealands came:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Tell me, worthy maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>what may be your name?”</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “Gu-drun they call me,<span class="hst">  </span>of Hagen’s blood I own me;</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ my birth was lofty,<span class="hst">  </span>of late but little love has here been shown me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “If you, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>my dear Gu-drun can be,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then faithfully to help you<span class="hst">  </span>gladness will give to me;</p>
			<p class="t0">For I, in truth, am Herwic;<span class="hst">  </span>you for my own I have chosen,</p>
			<p class="t0">And fain am I to show you<span class="hst">  </span>how you from bonds of sorrow I can loosen.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “If you would help me,<span class="hst">  </span>my good and worthy knight,</p>
			<p class="t0">I trust that you will grant me<span class="hst">  </span>that what I ask is right:</p>
			<p class="t0">To me these lovely maidens<span class="hst">  </span>their prayers are ever making,</p>
			<p class="t0">That from the fight with Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>some friendly hand will Hartmut soon be taking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“That will I do right gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>dearest lady mine.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to his men young Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>called above the din:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now against old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>let my flag be carried.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic then pressed forward,<span class="hst">  </span>and none of all his men behind him tarried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To do the lady’s bidding<span class="hst">  </span>hard it was for him;</p>
			<p class="t0">But Herwic called out loudly<span class="hst">  </span>to Wâ-te old and grim,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said, “My dear friend Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>to grant my wish be ready:</p>
			<p class="t0">Let strife be ended quickly:<span class="hst">  </span>this is the prayer of many a lovely lady.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake in wrath old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Sir Herwic, get you gone!</p>
			<p class="t0">Did I mind the will of a woman,<span class="hst">  </span>how should I do my own?</p>
			<p class="t0">If I thought to spare the foeman,<span class="hst">  </span>unasked I’d do it even.</p>
			<p class="t0">I will not do your bidding:<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut to pay for his sins must now be driven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic, for love of his lady,<span class="hst">  </span>on both the fighters sprang</p>
			<p class="t0">Right fearlessly and boldly;<span class="hst">  </span>loud the sword-blades rang.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te was wild with anger,<span class="hst">  </span>and bitter pain it gave him</p>
			<p class="t0">That, ere the foeman yielded,<span class="hst">  </span>Herwic from his hand should dare to save him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then he smote King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>a strong and heavy blow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere he could part the fighters,<span class="hst">  </span>and quickly laid him low;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now rushed the men of Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>and did from Wâ-te bear him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut was seized and taken,<span class="hst">  </span>though Herwic and his knights had sought to spare him.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c29">Tale the Twenty-Ninth.<br/><span class="small">HOW HARTMUT WAS TAKEN PRISONER.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te loud was storming;<span class="hst">  </span>then went he towards the hall</p>
			<p class="t0">That stood before the gateway.<span class="hst">  </span>On every side did fall</p>
			<p class="t0">The din of sword-blades clashing,<span class="hst">  </span>of groaning and of weeping.</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut was in bondage;<span class="hst">  </span>ill luck alone his liegemen, too, were reaping.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With him were also taken<span class="hst">  </span>eighty warriors brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">The others all were slaughtered.<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut his life did save,</p>
			<p class="t0">But to a ship was carried,<span class="hst">  </span>and fast and long they kept him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Not yet was sorrow ended;<span class="hst">  </span>greater ills must they know who now bewept him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Though often from the stronghold<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te’s men they drove,</p>
			<p class="t0">Both with slings and arrows,<span class="hst">  </span>yet still he grimly strove,</p>
			<p class="t0">And won from them the castle.<span class="hst">  </span>The heavy bolts were broken</p>
			<p class="t0">That once the gates had fastened;<span class="hst">  </span>at this fair women wept, with fear outspoken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Horant, the lord of Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>Queen Hilda’s flag now bore;</p>
			<p class="t0">Him followed many warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>he might not wish for more.</p>
			<p class="t0">Up to a palace tower<span class="hst">  </span>that high its walls was rearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Far above all others,<span class="hst">  </span>the Hegeling men the banner soon were bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As I have told already,<span class="hst">  </span>the castle now was won:</p>
			<p class="t0">To those they found within it<span class="hst">  </span>grimmest deeds were done.</p>
			<p class="t0">Great was the crowd on-pressing,<span class="hst">  </span>for booty to enrich them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then cried the stern old Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Where are now the sacks, and youths to fetch them?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now was broken open<span class="hst">  </span>many a well-filled room;</p>
			<p class="t0">Loud was the din and uproar<span class="hst">  </span>that from within did come:</p>
			<p class="t0">But all were not like-minded<span class="hst">  </span>who the halls were thronging;</p>
			<p class="t0">While wounds were dealt by many,<span class="hst">  </span>others for plunder searched, for riches longing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They bore so much from the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>as we have heard it told,</p>
			<p class="t0">That such a heavy burden<span class="hst">  </span>two ships could never hold:</p>
			<p class="t0">Richest silken clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>silver and gold, were taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">To load the ships on the waters;<span class="hst">  </span>tho’ much they took, yet much must be forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now within the castle<span class="hst">  </span>joy was all unknown.</p>
			<p class="t0">To all the folk there gathered<span class="hst">  </span>the greatest wrongs were done;</p>
			<p class="t0">Men alike and women<span class="hst">  </span>were slain who there were dwelling:</p>
			<p class="t0">To children in their cradles,<span class="hst">  </span>even to them, the foemen death were dealing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold then to Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>thus his mind made known:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Of harm to you these children<span class="hst">  </span>devil-a-bit have done.</p>
			<p class="t0">They indeed are blameless,<span class="hst">  </span>nor hate to our kin were showing;</p>
			<p class="t0">For the love of God, I beg you,<span class="hst">  </span>spare the poor babes, some pity now bestowing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The aged Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Thou hast the mind of a child;</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ now in the cradle wailing,<span class="hst">  </span>say, wouldst thou have willed</p>
			<p class="t0">That I should leave them living?<span class="hst">  </span>As soon as they are older,</p>
			<p class="t0">They never can be trusted;<span class="hst">  </span>to trust a Saxon wild would be no bolder.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Blood throughout the castle<span class="hst">  </span>flowed on every side.</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who saw the slaughter,<span class="hst">  </span>how bitterly they cried!</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the high-born Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>filled with care and sorrow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Sought Gu-drun, kind maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>she feared yet greater wrongs before the morrow.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then, her head low bending<span class="hst">  </span>before the lovely maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “Gu-drun, my lady,<span class="hst">  </span>have pity on my need,</p>
			<p class="t0">And, in my sharpest sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>leave me not forsaken;</p>
			<p class="t0">I trust me to your kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>or else my life will by your friends be taken.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Gladly will I shield you,”<span class="hst">  </span>she answered, “if I can;</p>
			<p class="t0">Ever to do you kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>and help you, I am fain.</p>
			<p class="t0">I will gain for you forgiveness;<span class="hst">  </span>no more for life be fearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Your maids and women also<span class="hst">  </span>must stand near me, my care they, too, are sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This doth make me happy,”<span class="hst">  </span>the youthful Ortrun said.</p>
			<p class="t0">With three and thirty maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>she was kindly kept and fed;</p>
			<p class="t0">Warriors two and sixty<span class="hst">  </span>there the ladies guarded:</p>
			<p class="t0">If they should gain their freedom,<span class="hst">  </span>their keepers would be slain, and thus rewarded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The old and wicked Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>ran to Gu-drun in haste;</p>
			<p class="t0">As if she were her bondwoman,<span class="hst">  </span>herself at her feet she cast,</p>
			<p class="t0">Saying: “Most high-born lady,<span class="hst">  </span>thou alone canst save us</p>
			<p class="t0">From Wâ-te and his followers;<span class="hst">  </span>else will his wrath, I ween, of life bereave us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her said Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“I hear you asking now</p>
			<p class="t0">That I to you be friendly;<span class="hst">  </span>how should I kindness show?</p>
			<p class="t0">Nought that e’er I wished for<span class="hst">  </span>to grant me were you willing:</p>
			<p class="t0">To me you showed but hatred;<span class="hst">  </span>and now my heart with hate for you is swelling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">That Ortrun then was near him<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te became aware:</p>
			<p class="t0">He his teeth was gnashing,<span class="hst">  </span>and straight up-stood he there;</p>
			<p class="t0">Now his eyes were flashing;<span class="hst">  </span>his yard-wide beard was flowing;</p>
			<p class="t0">And all were sorely frightened,<span class="hst">  </span>and feared what the Sturmisch lord would next be doing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Over him blood was streaming,<span class="hst">  </span>with it his clothes were wet.</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ Gu-drun was glad to see him,<span class="hst">  </span>she had liked it better yet</p>
			<p class="t0">If he, in mood less wrathful,<span class="hst">  </span>had come for her to greet him;</p>
			<p class="t0">Such fear they all were feeling,<span class="hst">  </span>I ween that no one there was glad to meet him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To meet her friend, old Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>went Gu-drun alone;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said Hilda’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>with sad and care-fraught tone:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Welcome art thou, Wâ-te!<span class="hst">  </span>How glad would be my greeting,</p>
			<p class="t0">If now these folk so many<span class="hst">  </span>no evil from thy hand should here be meeting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I thank you, fair young maiden!<span class="hst">  </span>Are you Queen Hilda’s child?</p>
			<p class="t0">Who are these many women,<span class="hst">  </span>whom here you seek to shield?”</p>
			<p class="t0">“This,” said Gu-drun, in answer,<span class="hst">  </span>“is Ortrun, high in breeding;</p>
			<p class="t0">I beg you, Wâ-te, spare her:<span class="hst">  </span>her women here your wrath are sorely dreading.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Those there are wretched maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>from far across the sea,</p>
			<p class="t0">Brought from the Hegeling kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>by Ludwig’s men with me.</p>
			<p class="t0">But you are wet and bloody;<span class="hst">  </span>do not come so near us:</p>
			<p class="t0">For all your help we thank you,<span class="hst">  </span>nor in our woe do scorn the love you bear us.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te went on further,<span class="hst">  </span>and Herwic soon he found,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with him youthful Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>as king in Ortland owned.</p>
			<p class="t0">Irold was there and Morunc;<span class="hst">  </span>Fru-te had thither hasted:</p>
			<p class="t0">None of these were idle;<span class="hst">  </span>many they slew, nor soon from slaughter rested.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Quickly then came Hergart,<span class="hst">  </span>the lady of a duke,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “Gu-drun, good lady,<span class="hst">  </span>on me with kindness look,—</p>
			<p class="t0">On me, a wretched woman.<span class="hst">  </span>Forget not that we ever</p>
			<p class="t0">Have been and are your handmaids;<span class="hst">  </span>and let me, lady, lose thy friendship never.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun in anger answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Stand back, come not so near!</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever we poor maidens<span class="hst">  </span>of wrong have had to fear,</p>
			<p class="t0">For all you wept but little,<span class="hst">  </span>and cared for it but slightly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Not much do I care either<span class="hst">  </span>whether for you it now goes ill or rightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“You still among my maidens<span class="hst">  </span>may linger, if you choose.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Now the stern old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>looked round among his foes,</p>
			<p class="t0">To find the wicked Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>whom he in wrath was seeking.</p>
			<p class="t0">That devilish crone, with her women,<span class="hst">  </span>the kindness of Gu-drun was now bespeaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Grimly then old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>stood before the hall,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “Gu-drun, my lady,<span class="hst">  </span>send down, with her maidens all,</p>
			<p class="t0">The old and wicked Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>who made you wash by the water;</p>
			<p class="t0">And with her send her kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>who in our land so many knights did slaughter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The lovely maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Not one of them is here.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Wâ-te, in his anger,<span class="hst">  </span>went in and to her came near;</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Now show me quickly<span class="hst">  </span>the women I am seeking;</p>
			<p class="t0">Else shall they, with your maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>all alike in the grave their home be making.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te was sorely angry,<span class="hst">  </span>of this was she aware.</p>
			<p class="t0">A wink of her eye then gave him<span class="hst">  </span>a lovely maiden there,</p>
			<p class="t0">And he knew the old she-devil,<span class="hst">  </span>on whom her glance was turning.</p>
			<p class="t0">“Tell me,” he said, “Queen Gerlind,<span class="hst">  </span>for other maids to wash are you still yearning?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then by the hand he took her,<span class="hst">  </span>and dragged her thence away;</p>
			<p class="t0">The while the wicked Gerlind<span class="hst">  </span>sank down in sore dismay.</p>
			<p class="t0">Said Wâ-te, wild to madness:<span class="hst">  </span>“Most lofty queen, I warn you,</p>
			<p class="t0">Never again, at your bidding,<span class="hst">  </span>shall my ladies wash for you; they now can scorn you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">I ween that when he brought her<span class="hst">  </span>without the palace gate,</p>
			<p class="t0">All looked on to witness<span class="hst">  </span>what he would do in his hate.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then by the hair he grasped her,<span class="hst">  </span>no one a whit he dreaded,</p>
			<p class="t0">His wrath indeed was bitter,<span class="hst">  </span>and at once the evil queen he there beheaded.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Loudly shrieked the maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>their fright at this was sore.</p>
			<p class="t0">Back again went Wâ-te,<span class="hst">  </span>and said: “Who is there more,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who to the queen owns kinship?<span class="hst">  </span>To me you now must show her;</p>
			<p class="t0">However high she holds her,<span class="hst">  </span>I yet to earth her head will quickly lower.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Sobbing then and weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>the child of Hettel said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Let these with me find shelter,<span class="hst">  </span>who now to me have fled,</p>
			<p class="t0">To ask of me forgiveness,<span class="hst">  </span>here my love bespeaking.</p>
			<p class="t0">This is the well-born Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>who with her Norman maids my help is seeking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those who were forgiven<span class="hst">  </span>she bade stand further back.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, in mood unfriendly,<span class="hst">  </span>the angry Wâ-te spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Where shall I find young Hergart,<span class="hst">  </span>now of a lord the lady,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who here within this kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>to take the love of the king’s great lord was ready?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">None of them would tell him,<span class="hst">  </span>but he to her came near,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “Were you the owner<span class="hst">  </span>of all this kingdom here,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who could in you be looking<span class="hst">  </span>to see so proud a bearing?</p>
			<p class="t0">Ill have you served your lady,<span class="hst">  </span>here in the land where you her lot were sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then all cried out together:<span class="hst">  </span>“Let her now go free.”</p>
			<p class="t0">But the aged Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That can never be;</p>
			<p class="t0">I have the care of the women;<span class="hst">  </span>behold my overseeing!”</p>
			<p class="t0">With a stroke he her beheaded,<span class="hst">  </span>while the maids in fright behind Gu-drun were fleeing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now from the bloody struggle<span class="hst">  </span>there was a rest for all.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the brave King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>came to Ludwig’s hall,</p>
			<p class="t0">Leading in his warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>with stains of blood upon them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun her welcome gave him;<span class="hst">  </span>her love for him was shown, and kindness done them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon the knightly Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>his sword from his side unbound:</p>
			<p class="t0">He then shook off his armor<span class="hst">  </span>into his shield on the ground,</p>
			<p class="t0">And stood before the ladies;<span class="hst">  </span>iron-stained was his body.</p>
			<p class="t0">That day, for love of his lady,<span class="hst">  </span>he oft on the field had hewn a pathway bloody.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With him came Ortwin also,<span class="hst">  </span>who was of Ortland king.</p>
			<p class="t0">When Irold came with Morunc,<span class="hst">  </span>the clothes they off did fling</p>
			<p class="t0">Worn outside their armor,<span class="hst">  </span>for they were over-heated.</p>
			<p class="t0">They wished to see the ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>and hoped by them they would be kindly greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now the Danish warriors<span class="hst">  </span>were both with slaughter spent,</p>
			<p class="t0">They laid aside their weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>and before the ladies went.</p>
			<p class="t0">Shields no longer bore they,<span class="hst">  </span>their helmets were unfastened;</p>
			<p class="t0">A very loving welcome<span class="hst">  </span>to give to both the knights Gu-drun then hastened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold and Morunc with him<span class="hst">  </span>then most lowly bowed</p>
			<p class="t0">Before the lovely maiden.<span class="hst">  </span>How well her bearing showed</p>
			<p class="t0">That to see these guests so lordly<span class="hst">  </span>she was indeed most willing!</p>
			<p class="t0">Right glad and happy truly<span class="hst">  </span>the child of the Hegeling Hilda now was feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Alike they all were thinking,<span class="hst">  </span>both lords and all their men:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Since now we have the castle,—<span class="hst">  </span>the stronghold Kassiane,—</p>
			<p class="t0">Of the land are we the masters,<span class="hst">  </span>and everything is ours.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon bade the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>that men should burn with fire the palace with its towers.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The Danish Fru-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That may never be;</p>
			<p class="t0">In this my queenly lady<span class="hst">  </span>to live must now be free.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bid that from out the castle<span class="hst">  </span>men the dead shall carry;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then ’twill be the better<span class="hst">  </span>for all our knights who in the land shall tarry.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Very strong is the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>wide it is and good;</p>
			<p class="t0">Bid from the walls now everywhere<span class="hst">  </span>to wash away the blood,</p>
			<p class="t0">That for a home the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>may not dislike it wholly:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the land of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>we will raid throughout, and see it fully.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They did as Fru-te bade them,<span class="hst">  </span>for wise he was, in truth;</p>
			<p class="t0">They bore from out the castle<span class="hst">  </span>many who there, forsooth,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were sorely slashed and wounded,<span class="hst">  </span>and many who were dying:</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to the waves they carried<span class="hst">  </span>those who before the gates in death were lying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They to the sea intrusted<span class="hst">  </span>four thousand of the dead;</p>
			<p class="t0">This to them was toilsome,<span class="hst">  </span>but Fru-te thus had bade.</p>
			<p class="t0">The work that they were doing<span class="hst">  </span>not as yet was ended;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then in Ludwig’s castle<span class="hst">  </span>the maid Ortrun was held, now ill-befriended.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Two and sixty warriors<span class="hst">  </span>and thirty maidens fair</p>
			<p class="t0">With her were also taken.<span class="hst">  </span>Then said Gu-drun: “Forbear!</p>
			<p class="t0">The maids are in my keeping,<span class="hst">  </span>my word to them I plighted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te may do as he wishes<span class="hst">  </span>with the knights he seized, until my wrongs are righted.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Siegfried, king of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>found a welcome warm,</p>
			<p class="t0">As should to knights be granted<span class="hst">  </span>after the battle-storm.</p>
			<p class="t0">Thanks to that worthy warrior<span class="hst">  </span>were by the ladies given,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he from the land of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>so far had come, and so well for them had striven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To the care of the Danish Horant<span class="hst">  </span>they their foes did give</p>
			<p class="t0">Who in the castle of Kassian<span class="hst">  </span>still were left alive.</p>
			<p class="t0">To him was Gu-drun intrusted,<span class="hst">  </span>and all her maidens near her:</p>
			<p class="t0">To her was he a kinsman;<span class="hst">  </span>they so might hope that he would kindness bear her.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Him they made the master<span class="hst">  </span>of forty towers strong,</p>
			<p class="t0">And six wide, roomy dwellings,<span class="hst">  </span>that stood the shore along.</p>
			<p class="t0">Over three rich palaces<span class="hst">  </span>to him was lordship granted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And there Gu-drun, the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>with him must stay, and nought she ever wanted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To guard their ships on the waters<span class="hst">  </span>others now they bade;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then back to castle Kassian<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut, the knight, was led</p>
			<p class="t0">With many of his kinsmen,<span class="hst">  </span>who in the fight were taken;</p>
			<p class="t0">There the Norman ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>seized with the knights, were held, by hope forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">They bade that care be taken<span class="hst">  </span>that none from them might flee;</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand of their brave ones<span class="hst">  </span>must the women oversee:</p>
			<p class="t0">They, with the men from Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>kept guard in many places.</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, meanwhile, with Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>sought other foes, and shields to hew in pieces.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Thirty thousand warriors<span class="hst">  </span>with them the war-path shared.</p>
			<p class="t0">Fire was thrown on all sides;<span class="hst">  </span>flames now flashed and flared.</p>
			<p class="t0">Throughout the land, the dwellings<span class="hst">  </span>everywhere were burning;</p>
			<p class="t0">And now the brave young Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>sad at heart, his first true woe was learning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The warriors from Sturmland,<span class="hst">  </span>and they of the Danish land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Broke down the well-built castles<span class="hst">  </span>on every hill and strand.</p>
			<p class="t0">They took away more plunder<span class="hst">  </span>than foemen ever carried;</p>
			<p class="t0">Many lovely women<span class="hst">  </span>the Hegelings seized, the while the land they harried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before the friends of Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>came back thro’ the wasted land,</p>
			<p class="t0">Six and twenty castles<span class="hst">  </span>fell beneath their hand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Happy went they homeward;<span class="hst">  </span>proud were they of their raiding;</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon of those there taken<span class="hst">  </span>a thousand or more to Hilda they were leading.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Throughout the Norman kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>was Hilda’s banner seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Waving now unhindered;<span class="hst">  </span>back again her men</p>
			<p class="t0">Bore it down to the sea-sand,<span class="hst">  </span>where they had left their lady.</p>
			<p class="t0">Here would they stay no longer;<span class="hst">  </span>to seek their homes they all were glad and ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those who still were resting<span class="hst">  </span>within King Hartmut’s halls</p>
			<p class="t0">Down to their friends came riding<span class="hst">  </span>from out the castle walls.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gladly both old and youthful<span class="hst">  </span>now each other greeted;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then asked they of Denmark:<span class="hst">  </span>“Youths, what luck in the raid hath you awaited?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To them King Ortwin answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“We there have done so well</p>
			<p class="t0">That I to those who helped me<span class="hst">  </span>my thanks must ever tell.</p>
			<p class="t0">Our foes are well rewarded,<span class="hst">  </span>tho’ sore has been the fighting,</p>
			<p class="t0">For all the wrongs they did us;<span class="hst">  </span>a thousand-fold have we ourselves been righting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Who best can tarry here</p>
			<p class="t0">To guard for us this kingdom?<span class="hst">  </span>Bid now Gu-drun, the fair,</p>
			<p class="t0">Come down again to meet us;<span class="hst">  </span>soon shall we be going</p>
			<p class="t0">To Hilda’s land of the Hegelings;<span class="hst">  </span>and what we bring we will to her be showing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said they all together,<span class="hst">  </span>both the old and young:</p>
			<p class="t0">“To Horant and to Morunc<span class="hst">  </span>doth the warder’s task belong;</p>
			<p class="t0">They, and a thousand with them,<span class="hst">  </span>here in this land must tarry.”</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas done as they had bidden;<span class="hst">  </span>but those who went did many a hostage carry.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When to go back to Hegeling<span class="hst">  </span>they now made up their minds,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to their ships they carried<span class="hst">  </span>goods of many kinds,</p>
			<p class="t0">All they once brought with them,<span class="hst">  </span>and all they had of plunder.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gladly they bore their booty;<span class="hst">  </span>on this their friends at home would look with wonder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut now was bidden<span class="hst">  </span>to leave his father’s hall,</p>
			<p class="t0">With all his bravest warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>five hundred men in all;</p>
			<p class="t0">They now were held in bondage<span class="hst">  </span>who had in strife been taken,</p>
			<p class="t0">And won from their foes thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>many a weary day, of hope forsaken.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortrun took they likewise,<span class="hst">  </span>the fair and high-born maid;</p>
			<p class="t0">On her and on her maidens<span class="hst">  </span>a heavy woe they laid:</p>
			<p class="t0">As they away from fatherland<span class="hst">  </span>far from friends were carried,</p>
			<p class="t0">They well might know the sorrows<span class="hst">  </span>felt by Gu-drun and her maids, who with them tarried.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Those whom they had taken<span class="hst">  </span>they bore with them away.</p>
			<p class="t0">The castles, overmastered,<span class="hst">  </span>henceforth must own the sway</p>
			<p class="t0">Of Morunc and of Horant:<span class="hst">  </span>when they homeward started,</p>
			<p class="t0">They left in the Norman kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>a thousand of their men, all fearless-hearted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Now do I beseech you,”<span class="hst">  </span>to them young Hartmut spake,</p>
			<p class="t0">“That in my father’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>my freedom I may take;</p>
			<p class="t0">If this to me be granted,<span class="hst">  </span>I pledge my life and riches.”</p>
			<p class="t0">The aged Wâ-te answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now in our hands to keep you wisdom teaches.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Why it is I know not,<span class="hst">  </span>that ’tis my nephew’s will</p>
			<p class="t0">To carry home young Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>who him would gladly kill,</p>
			<p class="t0">And take from him his riches.<span class="hst">  </span>Even before the morrow,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were only my nephew willing,<span class="hst">  </span>I would see that his foe no more in bonds should sorrow.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the youthful Ortwin:<span class="hst">  </span>“What gain to us would come</p>
			<p class="t0">If we should slay our foemen<span class="hst">  </span>here in their land and home?</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut and his kindred<span class="hst">  </span>may better things be hoping;</p>
			<p class="t0">Them will I bring to my mother,<span class="hst">  </span>as well beseems a knight to wrong ne’er stooping.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All their goods and riches<span class="hst">  </span>down to the ships were brought;</p>
			<p class="t0">With gold and gems and clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>and horses they were fraught.</p>
			<p class="t0">Her whom they had sought for<span class="hst">  </span>they were homeward bringing:</p>
			<p class="t0">They who once went mourning<span class="hst">  </span>now on their way were heard in gladness singing.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c30">Tale the Thirtieth.<br/><span class="small">HOW GUDRUN WAS BROUGHT HOME TO HILDA.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Homeward the men of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>gladly took their way;</p>
			<p class="t0">But many whom they carried<span class="hst">  </span>erewhile across the sea</p>
			<p class="t0">Now lay dead and wounded;<span class="hst">  </span>these must they be leaving:</p>
			<p class="t0">Three thousand men or over<span class="hst">  </span>were mourned by friends, who tears to each were giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now their ships went smoothly,<span class="hst">  </span>the winds for them were good:</p>
			<p class="t0">Bearing home their booty<span class="hst">  </span>they came in happy mood.</p>
			<p class="t0">How it was done I know not,<span class="hst">  </span>they sent on men before them</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the Hegeling ladies:<span class="hst">  </span>of what had them befallen they tidings bore them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With all their speed they hastened,—<span class="hst">  </span>that I well can say,—</p>
			<p class="t0">And reached at last their kingdom,—<span class="hst">  </span>I cannot tell the day.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never a tale so happy<span class="hst">  </span>had Lady Hilda gladdened</p>
			<p class="t0">As this that now they told her:<span class="hst">  </span>Ludwig was slain, who long her life had saddened.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She asked: “Still lives my daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>and all her maiden band?”</p>
			<p class="t0">They answered: “Herwic brings her,<span class="hst">  </span>his own, again to her land.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ne’er to so brave a warrior<span class="hst">  </span>it hath befallen better.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortrun, too, they are bringing,<span class="hst">  </span>and Hartmut, her brother; these in bonds they fetter.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“A happy tale you bring me,”<span class="hst">  </span>said then the well-bred queen;</p>
			<p class="t0">“My life with care and sadness<span class="hst">  </span>by them hath cumbered been.</p>
			<p class="t0">If e’er my eyes behold them,<span class="hst">  </span>ill shall they be faring:</p>
			<p class="t0">Through them have I much sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>untold and openly, for years been bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“The news that you have brought me<span class="hst">  </span>a rich reward shall gain;</p>
			<p class="t0">For you my heart have lightened<span class="hst">  </span>of hopeless woe and pain.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gold I give you freely,<span class="hst">  </span>and this I do most rightly.”</p>
			<p class="t0">They said: “Most noble lady,<span class="hst">  </span>to make us rich we need your gold but slightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Of the booty we have gotten<span class="hst">  </span>we’re bringing home so much,</p>
			<p class="t0">You need not think us scornful<span class="hst">  </span>if your gold we do not touch:</p>
			<p class="t0">Indeed, our boats are heavy<span class="hst">  </span>with shining gold they’re bearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Over all our riches<span class="hst">  </span>keepers we have, who well for it are caring.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then did Lady Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>when she the tidings heard</p>
			<p class="t0">That guests so dear were coming,<span class="hst">  </span>for food and drink give word;</p>
			<p class="t0">For stools and benches, also,<span class="hst">  </span>on which they should be seated.</p>
			<p class="t0">She of all was thoughtful,<span class="hst">  </span>that they might feel that they were fitly greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now at Matelan castle<span class="hst">  </span>none were idle found;</p>
			<p class="t0">Down on the sandy beaches<span class="hst">  </span>and on the level ground</p>
			<p class="t0">Workmen quickly gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>who nought of toil abated</p>
			<p class="t0">That fair Gu-drun and Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>as them beseemed, should worthily be seated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">I cannot tell you truly<span class="hst">  </span>if aught upon the sea</p>
			<p class="t0">Of ill had them befallen.<span class="hst">  </span>Six long weeks it must be</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere Ortwin’s men saw Matelan<span class="hst">  </span>at length before them looming.</p>
			<p class="t0">They brought with them their lady,<span class="hst">  </span>and many well-bred maids with her were coming.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When now they reached their homeland,<span class="hst">  </span>this for truth we hear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Their search and strife for the lady<span class="hst">  </span>had lasted full a year:</p>
			<p class="t0">It was upon a May-time<span class="hst">  </span>their foes they home were bringing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Their toils were not forgotten,<span class="hst">  </span>but, as they came, the strand with shouts was ringing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as Matelan castle<span class="hst">  </span>now from the ships was seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of sackbuts and of trumpets<span class="hst">  </span>loud began the din,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of horns as well as fluting,<span class="hst">  </span>and drums that men were beating.</p>
			<p class="t0">The ships of the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>at last in a harbor good their rest were meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">After these came also<span class="hst">  </span>Ortland’s warriors brave;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Hilda with her ladies<span class="hst">  </span>to them a welcome gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">Out from Matelan’s castle<span class="hst">  </span>she to the shore went riding;</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun they saw was coming,<span class="hst">  </span>with well-bred maidens wont to do her bidding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Alighted from their horses,<span class="hst">  </span>and standing on the sand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were Hilda and all her ladies.<span class="hst">  </span>Then, leading by the hand</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>came Irold, proud and knightly.</p>
			<p class="t0">Though Hilda well had known her,<span class="hst">  </span>yet now she knew her not, nor others rightly.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hilda, among the followers<span class="hst">  </span>a hundred women saw;</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “I know not truly<span class="hst">  </span>which one from me should draw</p>
			<p class="t0">A mother’s loving welcome;<span class="hst">  </span>unknown to me is my daughter:</p>
			<p class="t0">I give to all my greeting<span class="hst">  </span>who here with her have come across the water.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This is your long-lost daughter,”<span class="hst">  </span>by Irold she was told;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hilda to her stepped nearer.<span class="hst">  </span>Could ever wealth or gold</p>
			<p class="t0">Outweigh the bliss that filled them,<span class="hst">  </span>as each the other greeted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And welcome gave with kisses?<span class="hst">  </span>Now from their hearts had all their sorrow fleeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To Irold and his kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>kind greeting Hilda said;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to the aged Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>a lowly bow she made.</p>
			<p class="t0">“Welcome, knight of Sturmland!<span class="hst">  </span>bravely thou hast striven!</p>
			<p class="t0">Who can e’er reward thee,<span class="hst">  </span>unless to thee both land and crown are given?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He to the lady answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“To help you all I may,</p>
			<p class="t0">For that am I most willing,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en to my latest day.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, for love, she kissed him,<span class="hst">  </span>and Ortwin thus she greeted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now came Herwic also,<span class="hst">  </span>with proud and worthy knights, as him befitted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortrun, the Norman maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>then by the hand he led.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun besought her mother<span class="hst">  </span>kindly to meet the maid:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Dear lady, greet with kisses<span class="hst">  </span>this good and high-born maiden;</p>
			<p class="t0">Oft in my years of sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>my life with help and kindness she did gladden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“To none will I give kisses<span class="hst">  </span>who is to me unknown.</p>
			<p class="t0">Who are this maiden’s kinsmen?<span class="hst">  </span>What name doth the lady own,</p>
			<p class="t0">That you should bid me kiss her,<span class="hst">  </span>and be so friendly with her?”</p>
			<p class="t0">He said: “Her name is Ortrun;<span class="hst">  </span>she from the Norman kingdom cometh hither.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Never shall I kiss her;<span class="hst">  </span>how can you ask for this?</p>
			<p class="t0">If I should bid them kill her<span class="hst">  </span>I should not do amiss.</p>
			<p class="t0">Truly have her kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>filled my life with sorrow;</p>
			<p class="t0">They fed their eyes upon it,<span class="hst">  </span>and gladness all the while from this did borrow.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun to Hilda answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Ne’er hath this lovely maid</p>
			<p class="t0">The word to any given<span class="hst">  </span>that wrong on you be laid.</p>
			<p class="t0">Bethink you now, dear mother,<span class="hst">  </span>would blame to me be owing</p>
			<p class="t0">Should our men slay her kinsmen?<span class="hst">  </span>To the luckless maid, I beg, your love be showing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun in vain besought her,<span class="hst">  </span>until at last, with tears,</p>
			<p class="t0">The maid now begged her mother;<span class="hst">  </span>then gave she willing ears,</p>
			<p class="t0">And said: “I can no longer<span class="hst">  </span>see you sadly weeping:</p>
			<p class="t0">If e’er the maiden helped you,<span class="hst">  </span>for this shall she, in my land, her life be keeping.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the stately Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>kissed King Ludwig’s child,</p>
			<p class="t0">And greeted other ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>e’en as Gu-drun had willed.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then came also Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>from far-off lands brought thither,</p>
			<p class="t0">Erst with her found washing.<span class="hst">  </span>Now, by the hand, Sir Fru-te led her hither.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Gu-drun said further:<span class="hst">  </span>“Mother, most dear to me,</p>
			<p class="t0">Your greeting give to Hildeburg.<span class="hst">  </span>What better can there be</p>
			<p class="t0">Than true and faithful friendship?<span class="hst">  </span>Gold and jewels even,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whate’er the kingdom holdeth,<span class="hst">  </span>to Hildeburg most rightly should be given.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said to her Queen Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“To me it hath been told</p>
			<p class="t0">How she both weal and sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>hath borne with you of old.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never shall I sit happy<span class="hst">  </span>beneath the crown I’m wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Till I indeed reward her<span class="hst">  </span>for all the ills that she with you was sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At once she kissed the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>and others, too, as well.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then Hilda said to Fru-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“No shame for this I feel,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That I have come to meet you<span class="hst">  </span>and those whom you are leading.</p>
			<p class="t0">Good knights, you all are welcome<span class="hst">  </span>into the Hegeling land, now homeward speeding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">As they with thanks were bowing,<span class="hst">  </span>and she her greeting gave,</p>
			<p class="t0">Siegfried, king of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>drew nearer on the wave,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with his warriors, shouting,<span class="hst">  </span>up to the beach was springing:</p>
			<p class="t0">A merry song from Araby<span class="hst">  </span>were all, as best they might, together singing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda him awaited<span class="hst">  </span>till on the shore he stood.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then to the lord of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>a greeting warm she showed:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Sir Siegfried, king of Moorland,<span class="hst">  </span>welcome to you is given;</p>
			<p class="t0">It ne’er shall be forgotten<span class="hst">  </span>how you to right my wrongs have ever striven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Lady, if I have helped you,<span class="hst">  </span>to do it I was glad.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now must I hasten thither<span class="hst">  </span>to where my home I’ve had</p>
			<p class="t0">Since early days of boyhood,<span class="hst">  </span>ere I thence had ridden</p>
			<p class="t0">To war against King Herwic;<span class="hst">  </span>henceforth to strive with him it is forbidden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then they their ships unloaded,<span class="hst">  </span>and up they bore on the sand</p>
			<p class="t0">The many things brought with them<span class="hst">  </span>into Queen Hilda’s land.</p>
			<p class="t0">The night was drawing nearer,<span class="hst">  </span>the air was colder growing;</p>
			<p class="t0">The guests no longer waited:<span class="hst">  </span>to seek a shelter they in haste were going.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then with the guests Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>rode up on to the plain.</p>
			<p class="t0">Before great Matelan castle<span class="hst">  </span>huts and tents were seen</p>
			<p class="t0">Bedecked with gold and shining;<span class="hst">  </span>there the guests were seated</p>
			<p class="t0">Upon rich seats made ready:<span class="hst">  </span>within the tents were all most kindly treated.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Such wealth, at Hilda’s bidding,<span class="hst">  </span>was brought up to the land,</p>
			<p class="t0">That none need leave behind him<span class="hst">  </span>his pledge or bond to stand.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never in giving freely<span class="hst">  </span>could any host be vying</p>
			<p class="t0">With this most high-born widow:<span class="hst">  </span>no guest need wine or other cheer be buying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There the weary rested<span class="hst">  </span>until five days were gone.</p>
			<p class="t0">The greatest care and kindness<span class="hst">  </span>unto the guests were shown;</p>
			<p class="t0">But Hartmut greatly sorrowed—<span class="hst">  </span>no happiness it gave him—</p>
			<p class="t0">Until the lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>begged Queen Hilda would in freedom leave him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then Ortwin went with his sister<span class="hst">  </span>where Hilda had her seat.</p>
			<p class="t0">She said: “My dearest mother,<span class="hst">  </span>never this forget,—</p>
			<p class="t0">We must not reward with evil<span class="hst">  </span>him who a wrong is doing.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of your worthy name bethink you;<span class="hst">  </span>you should on Hartmut smile, forgiveness showing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She answered: “Dearest daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>you do not ask aright:</p>
			<p class="t0">I at the hands of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>the greatest ills have met;</p>
			<p class="t0">He must atone in bondage<span class="hst">  </span>for all his wrongful dealing.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then at the feet of Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun fell down, with sixty maidens, kneeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the lady Ortrun:<span class="hst">  </span>“In freedom let him live;</p>
			<p class="t0">To you will he be faithful,<span class="hst">  </span>for this my word I give.</p>
			<p class="t0">Be to my brother friendly,<span class="hst">  </span>nor of your love be sparing;</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twill be to you an honor<span class="hst">  </span>if he again the kingly crown be wearing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His friends all wept together<span class="hst">  </span>that he in bondage sat,</p>
			<p class="t0">Wearing chains so heavy;<span class="hst">  </span>their eyes with tears were wet:</p>
			<p class="t0">Much they pitied Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>no more his kingdom swaying.</p>
			<p class="t0">On him and on his followers<span class="hst">  </span>fetters fast and strongest now were weighing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake to them Queen Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“Leave your weeping now;</p>
			<p class="t0">Their chains will I unloosen;<span class="hst">  </span>they to my court may go:</p>
			<p class="t0">But not to seek their freedom<span class="hst">  </span>they their word must give me,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with an oath must swear it,—<span class="hst">  </span>not hence to ride unbidden, nor to leave me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the noble bondsmen<span class="hst">  </span>were from chains set free.</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun then bade these warriors<span class="hst">  </span>to bathe them in the sea;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, in finest clothing,<span class="hst">  </span>men to court must lead them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Knights were they most worthy;<span class="hst">  </span>and so the more, good luck did ever speed them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There among the others<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut now was seen;</p>
			<p class="t0">Never a braver warrior<span class="hst">  </span>or better knight had been:</p>
			<p class="t0">E’en now, amid his sorrows,<span class="hst">  </span>such a mien was he wearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">It seemed as if a pencil<span class="hst">  </span>had drawn him there, and a parchment him was bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now on him with kindness<span class="hst">  </span>did all the ladies look,</p>
			<p class="t0">While he, their friendship trusting,<span class="hst">  </span>greater boldness took.</p>
			<p class="t0">Ill-will, that erst was borne him,<span class="hst">  </span>none were longer feeling;</p>
			<p class="t0">It was by all forgotten<span class="hst">  </span>what wounds they erst had been to each other dealing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Herwic now bethought him<span class="hst">  </span>from the land of the Hegeling</p>
			<p class="t0">How he might be going.<span class="hst">  </span>He bade his men to bring</p>
			<p class="t0">His clothing and his weapons,<span class="hst">  </span>and on the horses load them:</p>
			<p class="t0">When this was known to Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>to let them go no ready will she showed them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “My good Lord Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>I beg you longer stay!</p>
			<p class="t0">All your love and kindness<span class="hst">  </span>a weight on me doth lay.</p>
			<p class="t0">Not yet with my good wishes<span class="hst">  </span>may you hence be riding;</p>
			<p class="t0">Before you yet shall leave me,<span class="hst">  </span>there shall be high times for the guests with me abiding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her Lord Herwic answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Lady, you know the way,</p>
			<p class="t0">How those who send their kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>to lands which others sway</p>
			<p class="t0">Again at home to see them<span class="hst">  </span>are always greatly longing:</p>
			<p class="t0">With pain our friends are waiting<span class="hst">  </span>until again they see us homeward thronging.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake again Queen Hilda:<span class="hst">  </span>“Grudge not, I beg, to me</p>
			<p class="t0">One happiness and honor,<span class="hst">  </span>for none can greater be;</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic, king most worthy,<span class="hst">  </span>the boon now deign to give me,</p>
			<p class="t0">That I, poor lonely woman,<span class="hst">  </span>may see my daughter crowned, ere she shall leave me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">For this was he unwilling;<span class="hst">  </span>but still she begged and bade:</p>
			<p class="t0">Thereby those held in bondage<span class="hst">  </span>were soon from sorrow freed.</p>
			<p class="t0">When now at last he told her<span class="hst">  </span>that to do it he was willing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the Lady Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>was glad in heart, and rest of mind was feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Seats were made at her bidding,<span class="hst">  </span>yet more and better still,</p>
			<p class="t0">Which many knights with honor,<span class="hst">  </span>near Hilda, soon did fill,</p>
			<p class="t0">When came the high times merry,<span class="hst">  </span>that now were widely bruited.</p>
			<p class="t0">To crown Gu-drun, the fair one,<span class="hst">  </span>King Herwic bade, for him it now well suited.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of those who him had followed<span class="hst">  </span>there went away not one</p>
			<p class="t0">Before at Matelan castle<span class="hst">  </span>the high times were begun.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then by Lady Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>was clothing kindly given</p>
			<p class="t0">To sixty maids or over:<span class="hst">  </span>for praise and honor she had ever striven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To full a hundred women<span class="hst">  </span>clothing good she gave:</p>
			<p class="t0">None of those were slighted,<span class="hst">  </span>but all her care did have,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who from their homes were taken;<span class="hst">  </span>these had clothes the rarest.</p>
			<p class="t0">The gifts indeed were wondrous<span class="hst">  </span>that Hilda gave, of queens the best and fairest.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold must guard the treasure;<span class="hst">  </span>to dwell in Hilda’s home</p>
			<p class="t0">That knight erelong was bidden,<span class="hst">  </span>and quickly did he come:</p>
			<p class="t0">Wâ-te, he of Sturmland,<span class="hst">  </span>must carve the meat at table;</p>
			<p class="t0">They also sent for Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>to come to her as soon as he was able.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Her cup-bearer she made him;<span class="hst">  </span>thereon thus spake the knight:</p>
			<p class="t0">“That will I be most gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>if now you think it right.</p>
			<p class="t0">A fief you then will give me,<span class="hst">  </span>with banners twelve to show it;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then am I lord in Denmark.”<span class="hst">  </span>Queen Hilda smiled, but never thought to do it.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To Fru-te thus she answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“That gift is not for thee;</p>
			<p class="t0">For still your nephew Horant<span class="hst">  </span>Daneland’s lord must be.</p>
			<p class="t0">You, in his stead, for friendship,<span class="hst">  </span>must now our cup be filling;</p>
			<p class="t0">And, while he is with the Normans,<span class="hst">  </span>kindly to care for him must you be willing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The men and maids in waiting<span class="hst">  </span>all to their tasks were set:</p>
			<p class="t0">Silken clothes were called for;<span class="hst">  </span>a hoard both rich and great,</p>
			<p class="t0">In rooms and chests long treasured,<span class="hst">  </span>Queen Hilda bade them open.</p>
			<p class="t0">These were brought by stewards,<span class="hst">  </span>and all the guests to them were freely holpen.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of these the very lowest<span class="hst">  </span>had clothing of the best.</p>
			<p class="t0">If others than the Normans<span class="hst">  </span>were bidden to the feast,</p>
			<p class="t0">Or why they called them thither,<span class="hst">  </span>I have no way of telling:</p>
			<p class="t0">Full thirty thousand were they<span class="hst">  </span>whom there they brought, in Norman lands once dwelling.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Clothes for all were wanted,<span class="hst">  </span>but where could these be found?</p>
			<p class="t0">If e’en the wealth of Araby<span class="hst">  </span>any there had owned,</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween he could no better<span class="hst">  </span>or finer clothes have given</p>
			<p class="t0">Than now they shared so freely: that this should be, Gu-drun her best had striven.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Soon as this lovely maiden<span class="hst">  </span>by the guests had now her seat,</p>
			<p class="t0">She sent for her brother Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>and did his coming wait,</p>
			<p class="t0">That she the word might give him<span class="hst">  </span>to be fair Ortrun’s lover;</p>
			<p class="t0">She, King Ludwig’s daughter,<span class="hst">  </span>beside Gu-drun was seated then, as ever.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortwin, lord of Ortland,<span class="hst">  </span>made haste to his sister’s bower:</p>
			<p class="t0">Him welcomed many a maiden<span class="hst">  </span>who sat with her that hour.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, from her seat arising,<span class="hst">  </span>by the hand she kindly took him;</p>
			<p class="t0">And him aside then leading,<span class="hst">  </span>at the further end of the hall she thus bespoke him,</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Saying: “Dearest brother,<span class="hst">  </span>hear what for you is best;</p>
			<p class="t0">All that I shall tell you<span class="hst">  </span>comes from a faithful breast.</p>
			<p class="t0">If you for bliss are hoping,<span class="hst">  </span>so long as you are living,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then for Hartmut’s sister<span class="hst">  </span>you must, as best you may, henceforth be striving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her young Ortwin answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Now think you this is well?</p>
			<p class="t0">I and her brother Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>never as friends can feel;</p>
			<p class="t0">We slew their father Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>and, when to me she’s wedded,</p>
			<p class="t0">Of him will she be thinking;<span class="hst">  </span>then with her sighs I oft shall be upbraided.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“You such love must show her<span class="hst">  </span>that for him she will not long.</p>
			<p class="t0">If now this word I give you,<span class="hst">  </span>’tis from a love as strong</p>
			<p class="t0">As I have had for any,<span class="hst">  </span>or e’er in my life was feeling.</p>
			<p class="t0">Should she to you be wedded,<span class="hst">  </span>your bliss with her will be beyond all telling.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said her knightly brother:<span class="hst">  </span>“If she to you is known,</p>
			<p class="t0">And now you think the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>will her for a mistress own,</p>
			<p class="t0">Gladly will I love her,—<span class="hst">  </span>a maid of such high-breeding.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Him Gu-drun then answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“You’ll ne’er a sorry day with her be leading.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of this he spoke to others,<span class="hst">  </span>but Hilda’s word was nay;</p>
			<p class="t0">He told it unto Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>to hear what he would say,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who held it right and worthy;<span class="hst">  </span>then to Fru-te speaking,</p>
			<p class="t0">That friend would have him woo her,<span class="hst">  </span>“for many knights will she your own be making.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Soothed should be the hatred<span class="hst">  </span>that we each other bore;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of how it may be ended,<span class="hst">  </span>I now will tell you more;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then,” said the Danish Fru-te,<span class="hst">  </span>whose word was ever heeded,</p>
			<p class="t0">“Hildeburg, the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>to young King Hartmut also must be wedded.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The wise and upright Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>with faithful words thus spake:</p>
			<p class="t0">“I deem it right and fitting<span class="hst">  </span>the maiden him should take;</p>
			<p class="t0">When in the land of Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>she is queen and lady,</p>
			<p class="t0">A thousand lordly castles<span class="hst">  </span>to own her sway will there be glad and ready.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then to the high-born Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun the fair thus spake,</p>
			<p class="t0">With words unheard by others:<span class="hst">  </span>“Care for your weal I’ll take;</p>
			<p class="t0">If I may well reward you,<span class="hst">  </span>my friend and playmate dearest,</p>
			<p class="t0">For all the love you’ve shown me,<span class="hst">  </span>soon in the Norman land a crown thou wearest.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her then said fair Hildeburg:<span class="hst">  </span>“For me it were not well</p>
			<p class="t0">To give my troth to any<span class="hst">  </span>who ne’er his love did tell,</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor unto me, in fondness,<span class="hst">  </span>e’er his heart was turning;</p>
			<p class="t0">Should we grow old together,<span class="hst">  </span>I fear between us oft there’ll be heart-burning.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Her Gu-drun thus answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Give not a thought to that:</p>
			<p class="t0">I soon will send to Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and bid him answer straight</p>
			<p class="t0">Whether he now would like it<span class="hst">  </span>if from his pledge I free him,</p>
			<p class="t0">As well as all his followers,<span class="hst">  </span>and send him home, that his friends again may see him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If he his thanks shall tell me,<span class="hst">  </span>I then in turn will bid</p>
			<p class="t0">That he by deeds shall show it,<span class="hst">  </span>and shall my wishes heed.</p>
			<p class="t0">I then will freely ask him<span class="hst">  </span>if he will wed a maiden,</p>
			<p class="t0">That I and all my kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>may him with love and friendship ever gladden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her they brought young Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>king of the Norman land,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with him came old Fru-te.<span class="hst">  </span>Near her, on either hand,</p>
			<p class="t0">Proud Hildeburg and Ortrun<span class="hst">  </span>within her bower were sitting;</p>
			<p class="t0">If the lady’s word they heeded,<span class="hst">  </span>their many woes they both would be forgetting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut, the son of Ludwig,<span class="hst">  </span>went through the palace hall;</p>
			<p class="t0">To him a friendly greeting<span class="hst">  </span>was given by one and all,</p>
			<p class="t0">Alike both high and lowly<span class="hst">  </span>from their seats arising.</p>
			<p class="t0">None than he was braver;<span class="hst">  </span>no worth or greatness e’er in him was missing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He by Gu-drun, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>to seat himself was told;</p>
			<p class="t0">And neither of the others<span class="hst">  </span>her greeting did withhold.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said Queen Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“I beg you to be sitting</p>
			<p class="t0">Near my faithful maidens,<span class="hst">  </span>who washed with me for your knights, as was befitting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“This in scorn you bid me,<span class="hst">  </span>fair and lovely queen!</p>
			<p class="t0">Whatever wrong was done you<span class="hst">  </span>truly gives me pain:</p>
			<p class="t0">’Twas by my mother’s wishes<span class="hst">  </span>that this from me was hidden;</p>
			<p class="t0">To keep it from my father,<span class="hst">  </span>and from his knights as well, were all men bidden.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To him the maiden answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“My wish I may not hide:</p>
			<p class="t0">I now, in truth, Sir Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>must speak with you aside.</p>
			<p class="t0">I and yourself, we only,<span class="hst">  </span>may hear what I am saying.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Hartmut then bethought him:<span class="hst">  </span>“May God now grant she is not falsely playing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">No one else but Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>allowed she to come near;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then the high-born maiden<span class="hst">  </span>said in Hartmut’s ear:</p>
			<p class="t0">“If you to me will hearken,<span class="hst">  </span>and do what I shall tell you</p>
			<p class="t0">With ready heart and freely,<span class="hst">  </span>now of all your sorrows I will heal you.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Well I know your wisdom,”<span class="hst">  </span>then young Hartmut said;</p>
			<p class="t0">“Of aught that is unworthy<span class="hst">  </span>I need not be afraid.</p>
			<p class="t0">My heart for nothing wishes,<span class="hst">  </span>unless to do your bidding:</p>
			<p class="t0">Gladly, high-born lady,<span class="hst">  </span>to all that you shall say will I give heeding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “My wish I tell you,<span class="hst">  </span>and now your life would cheer;</p>
			<p class="t0">I, and my kinsmen with me,<span class="hst">  </span>will give you a helpmeet fair.</p>
			<p class="t0">To keep both land and honor<span class="hst">  </span>you may thus be seeking,</p>
			<p class="t0">And of the hate we bore you<span class="hst">  </span>none shall evermore a word be speaking.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“Who is it, say, fair lady,<span class="hst">  </span>that you for me will choose?</p>
			<p class="t0">Ere yet my love I give her,<span class="hst">  </span>life would I rather lose</p>
			<p class="t0">Than ever that my kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>her with scorn were eying;</p>
			<p class="t0">For me it were far better<span class="hst">  </span>that I in death upon the field were lying.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“I will give your sister Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>the maid beloved and fair,</p>
			<p class="t0">To be a wife to my brother,<span class="hst">  </span>himself to me most dear.</p>
			<p class="t0">You must wed with Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>of a king the well-born daughter:</p>
			<p class="t0">Never a dearer maiden<span class="hst">  </span>you in the world could find, where’er you sought her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">“If this indeed may happen,”<span class="hst">  </span>then young Hartmut said,</p>
			<p class="t0">“And now your brother Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>shall take that lovely maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">My dear-loved sister, Ortrun,<span class="hst">  </span>and she to him is wedded,</p>
			<p class="t0">Then I will woo fair Hildeburg;<span class="hst">  </span>thus hate will end, nor longer shall be dreaded.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She said: “To this I’ve brought him;<span class="hst">  </span>his troth to her he gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">If now ’twould make you happy<span class="hst">  </span>your father’s lands to have,</p>
			<p class="t0">And again within his castles<span class="hst">  </span>that you should soon be living,</p>
			<p class="t0">You well may wed with Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>and there the queenly crown to her be giving.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He said: “That pledge I gladly,<span class="hst">  </span>and on it give my hand;</p>
			<p class="t0">As soon as the king of Ortland<span class="hst">  </span>shall with my sister stand,</p>
			<p class="t0">And both the crown have taken,<span class="hst">  </span>then I, no more forbearing,</p>
			<p class="t0">Will, with lovely Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>among our men our lands and fiefs be sharing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When he his word had plighted,<span class="hst">  </span>then said the high-born maid:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Now will I do gladly<span class="hst">  </span>a further friendly deed;</p>
			<p class="t0">Unto the lord of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>for a wife will I be giving</p>
			<p class="t0">The sister of King Herwic,<span class="hst">  </span>that she with him may evermore be living.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">I ween that never hatred<span class="hst">  </span>was smoothed as now was done:</p>
			<p class="t0">Brave knights who long were foemen<span class="hst">  </span>now became as one.</p>
			<p class="t0">Fru-te, the lord of Daneland,<span class="hst">  </span>thought it right and fitting</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon to send for Ortwin;<span class="hst">  </span>also the Moorland king must them be meeting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When they to court were coming,<span class="hst">  </span>finest clothes they wore.</p>
			<p class="t0">The news Gu-drun had told them<span class="hst">  </span>others to Wâ-te bore;</p>
			<p class="t0">To Irold, too, they gave it,<span class="hst">  </span>as soon as he came thither;</p>
			<p class="t0">This aside they talked of,<span class="hst">  </span>and fitting speech long time they held together.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake the aged Wâ-te:<span class="hst">  </span>“Peace we can never know</p>
			<p class="t0">Until Ortrun and Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>to Hilda, the queen, shall go,</p>
			<p class="t0">And ask of her forgiveness,<span class="hst">  </span>down at her feet low bending.</p>
			<p class="t0">Only if she allows it,<span class="hst">  </span>can we be friends, and hatred have an ending.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then spake Gu-drun, the high-born:<span class="hst">  </span>“This I can truly say:</p>
			<p class="t0">To them is she not unfriendly;<span class="hst">  </span>Ortrun wears to-day</p>
			<p class="t0">Such clothes as by my mother<span class="hst">  </span>to me and my maids were given.</p>
			<p class="t0">I’ll gladly gain forgiveness;<span class="hst">  </span>in me they all may trust, from home now riven.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Within a ring of maidens<span class="hst">  </span>Ortrun then they set,</p>
			<p class="t0">And with her also Hildeburg,<span class="hst">  </span>of birth both high and meet:</p>
			<p class="t0">Ortwin then and Hartmut<span class="hst">  </span>led them out to wed them.</p>
			<p class="t0">“I hope,” said Lady Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>“that now, forever, we our friends have made them.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When to his side young Ortwin<span class="hst">  </span>did the maiden Ortrun bring,</p>
			<p class="t0">Lovingly and kindly,<span class="hst">  </span>he took a golden ring,</p>
			<p class="t0">And this upon the finger<span class="hst">  </span>of her fair white hand he fitted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then far off were driven<span class="hst">  </span>the many woes that late her life had greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hartmut around fair Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>then his arms did throw;</p>
			<p class="t0">Each on the hand of the other<span class="hst">  </span>did a golden ring bestow.</p>
			<p class="t0">The lovely maid was blameless,<span class="hst">  </span>and sorrow gave him never;</p>
			<p class="t0">Of him and of fair Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>nothing their faithful hearts thro’ life could sever.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said Queen Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“Herwic, my lord most dear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Say, does the land of your fathers<span class="hst">  </span>lie to us so near</p>
			<p class="t0">That men could bring your sister,<span class="hst">  </span>if this by us were needed,</p>
			<p class="t0">Here to my mother’s kingdom,<span class="hst">  </span>that she to the lord of Karadie may now be wedded?”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her King Herwic answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“This will I say to you:</p>
			<p class="t0">Your men, if they will hasten,<span class="hst">  </span>in twelve days’ time can go;</p>
			<p class="t0">But if any to your kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>the maiden would be leading,</p>
			<p class="t0">Ill luck, I ween, awaits him,<span class="hst">  </span>unless with him my own good knights be speeding.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then answered Hilda’s daughter:<span class="hst">  </span>“Your help, I beg you, grant;</p>
			<p class="t0">By doing this, of happiness<span class="hst">  </span>you nought shall ever want.</p>
			<p class="t0">To your men both food and clothing<span class="hst">  </span>my mother will be giving;</p>
			<p class="t0">Only bring us the maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>that I may thank you, long as you are living.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her then said Lord Herwic:<span class="hst">  </span>“How can she be clad?</p>
			<p class="t0">The mighty lord of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>a waste of my kingdom made;</p>
			<p class="t0">There he burned my castles,<span class="hst">  </span>and of her clothes bereft her.”</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said the king of Moorland:<span class="hst">  </span>“Her would I woo, if only a smock were left her.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To bring the maid then Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>a hundred warriors sent;</p>
			<p class="t0">He bade his men to hasten<span class="hst">  </span>when on their way they went.</p>
			<p class="t0">He begged that Wâ-te and Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>would with them go riding:</p>
			<p class="t0">This was to them a burden;<span class="hst">  </span>but yet the worthy knights both did his bidding.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With greatest speed they hastened,<span class="hst">  </span>both by day and night,</p>
			<p class="t0">Until they found the maiden.<span class="hst">  </span>Wâ-te they feared would fight,—</p>
			<p class="t0">’Gainst this did Herwic’s liegemen<span class="hst">  </span>give their careful heeding.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon from her home the lady,<span class="hst">  </span>with four and twenty maids, the knights were leading.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By Wâ-te they were guided<span class="hst">  </span>from the castle down to the sand:</p>
			<p class="t0">Two ships they found, with row-boats,<span class="hst">  </span>lying by the strand;</p>
			<p class="t0">One of these they seized on,<span class="hst">  </span>and, helped by breezes blowing,</p>
			<p class="t0">They fast away were sailing:<span class="hst">  </span>throughout twelve days they to their homes were going.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">When to the land of the Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>they had brought the maid,</p>
			<p class="t0">Many knights bethought them<span class="hst">  </span>over the sand to speed,</p>
			<p class="t0">To meet the lovely lady,<span class="hst">  </span>and all with banners hasted.</p>
			<p class="t0">They who had brought the maiden<span class="hst">  </span>had kept their oaths, nor from the task had rested.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">How could any maiden<span class="hst">  </span>a better welcome find?</p>
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun went forth to meet her,<span class="hst">  </span>and gave her greeting kind;</p>
			<p class="t0">Hilda, with many ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>to see the maiden hasted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Nor came King Herwic’s sister<span class="hst">  </span>all alone, though with fire her land was wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She from home was followed<span class="hst">  </span>by full three hundred men.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now when the kingly Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>his sister met again,</p>
			<p class="t0">He, to show her honor,<span class="hst">  </span>rode forward, proudly dashing;</p>
			<p class="t0">So did many others:<span class="hst">  </span>loud were the shields of the knights together clashing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Four kings both rich and mighty<span class="hst">  </span>rode to meet her there;</p>
			<p class="t0">Thereon the knights ’gan wrangle<span class="hst">  </span>which of the ladies fair</p>
			<p class="t0">Was loveliest and fairest.<span class="hst">  </span>Long their time they wasted,</p>
			<p class="t0">For all alike were worthy;<span class="hst">  </span>on this at last their wordy war they rested.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The fair Gu-drun then kissed her<span class="hst">  </span>and those who with her came.</p>
			<p class="t0">They walked along the seashore,<span class="hst">  </span>till a tent was seen by them,</p>
			<p class="t0">With richest silken hangings;<span class="hst">  </span>while they stood thereunder,</p>
			<p class="t0">What now to her should happen<span class="hst">  </span>gave to Herwic’s sister greatest wonder.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now the king of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>forthwith to come they bade;</p>
			<p class="t0">Then they asked the maiden:<span class="hst">  </span>“Will you this man now wed?</p>
			<p class="t0">Kingdoms nine most mighty<span class="hst">  </span>have for their master owned him.”</p>
			<p class="t0">With him were knights full many,<span class="hst">  </span>yellow in hue, now standing all around him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">His father and his mother<span class="hst">  </span>were not of faith the same;</p>
			<p class="t0">But him, so light in color,<span class="hst">  </span>one might a Christian name.</p>
			<p class="t0">Like to gold, spun finely,<span class="hst">  </span>the hair on his head was lying:</p>
			<p class="t0">She would choose unwisely<span class="hst">  </span>if she to him her love were now denying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">She was slow her love to grant him,<span class="hst">  </span>as oft one sees a maid;</p>
			<p class="t0">But she to him was given.<span class="hst">  </span>The worthy knight then said:</p>
			<p class="t0">“So well I like this lady,<span class="hst">  </span>from love I ne’er can free me.</p>
			<p class="t0">Never will I leave her,<span class="hst">  </span>and as her husband men erelong shall see me.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">At last this knight and maiden<span class="hst">  </span>each their troth did plight:</p>
			<p class="t0">Both of them scarce waited<span class="hst">  </span>till day should turn to night,</p>
			<p class="t0">When, from others hidden,<span class="hst">  </span>they should their bliss be owning.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon, ’mid knightly warriors,<span class="hst">  </span>daughters of four rich kings were hallowed for the crowning.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c31">Tale the Thirty-First.<br/><span class="small">HOW THE FOUR KINGS WERE WEDDED IN HILDA’S LAND.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then the kings were hallowed,<span class="hst">  </span>as in days of yore;</p>
			<p class="t0">Also there were knighted<span class="hst">  </span>five hundred men or more.</p>
			<p class="t0">Now in Hilda’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>the folk high times were having;</p>
			<p class="t0">It was at Matelan castle,<span class="hst">  </span>before the walls where the sea the sands was laving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There the fair Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>to all fine clothing gave.</p>
			<p class="t0">How, in the sight of ladies,<span class="hst">  </span>rode Wâ-te old and brave!</p>
			<p class="t0">How Irold, too, and Fru-te<span class="hst">  </span>of Daneland, rode before them!</p>
			<p class="t0">One heard the spear-shafts broken,<span class="hst">  </span>as these they lowered, and in the onset bore them.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Lightly the wind was blowing,<span class="hst">  </span>but the dust was dark as night;</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet to the maidens’ clothing<span class="hst">  </span>the knights gave heeding slight,</p>
			<p class="t0">Altho’ ’twas soiled and covered<span class="hst">  </span>with the dust thick flying.</p>
			<p class="t0">Before the ladies seated,<span class="hst">  </span>riders bold in many a tilt were vying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now at length the maidens<span class="hst">  </span>were left no longer there;</p>
			<p class="t0">They, with the queenly Hilda,<span class="hst">  </span>were led to a window near,</p>
			<p class="t0">Where the daring champions<span class="hst">  </span>their eyes on them were feeding:</p>
			<p class="t0">Beside the four betrothéd,<span class="hst">  </span>a hundred well-clothed maids they were thither leading.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Many wandering players<span class="hst">  </span>there let their skill be shown;</p>
			<p class="t0">The best that each was able,<span class="hst">  </span>how gladly was it done!</p>
			<p class="t0">When early mass was ended,<span class="hst">  </span>upon the next day’s morning,</p>
			<p class="t0">And God by them was worshiped,<span class="hst">  </span>knights of the sword again to their games were turning.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Of uproar and of gladness<span class="hst">  </span>where could more be found?</p>
			<p class="t0">Of many tunes and singing<span class="hst">  </span>the halls gave back the sound.</p>
			<p class="t0">Until four days were over,<span class="hst">  </span>there the high times lasted:</p>
			<p class="t0">Well-born throngs were gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>nor oft the hours in idleness they wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">An open-handed giver,<span class="hst">  </span>that day was Herwic seen.</p>
			<p class="t0">He knew the wandering players,<span class="hst">  </span>who there had come again,</p>
			<p class="t0">Were bent on growing richer,<span class="hst">  </span>and well for this were striving;</p>
			<p class="t0">Herwic meant, in kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>that all, while there, should gain an easy living.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">First the lord of Sealand<span class="hst">  </span>flung his gifts around</p>
			<p class="t0">With willing hand so freely<span class="hst">  </span>that thanks from all did sound</p>
			<p class="t0">Who saw his love and kindness,<span class="hst">  </span>or heard about it later:</p>
			<p class="t0">In ruddy gold King Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>the worth of full a thousand pounds did scatter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Clothing, too, was given<span class="hst">  </span>by his friends as well as kin;</p>
			<p class="t0">Horses finely saddled<span class="hst">  </span>many there did win,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who before not often<span class="hst">  </span>on such steeds had ridden.</p>
			<p class="t0">When this was seen by Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>in giving then he would not be outbidden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">He, the king of Ortland<span class="hst">  </span>finest clothes now gave:</p>
			<p class="t0">Since then, if better clothing<span class="hst">  </span>knights did ever have,</p>
			<p class="t0">Forsooth we cannot tell you,—<span class="hst">  </span>it never reached our hearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">He and all his followers<span class="hst">  </span>stood bereft, erelong, of much that they were wearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">No one now could reckon<span class="hst">  </span>what store of clothing good</p>
			<p class="t0">Was given by those from Moorland.<span class="hst">  </span>There fine horses stood,</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon to be given also,—<span class="hst">  </span>such indeed is the saying:</p>
			<p class="t0">Those who were to have them<span class="hst">  </span>for better never hoped, nor e’er were praying.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">All were now made richer,<span class="hst">  </span>both the young and old.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then, too, was seen King Hartmut;<span class="hst">  </span>nought would he withhold,</p>
			<p class="t0">As though his home and kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>had not in war been wasted:</p>
			<p class="t0">They saw him give so freely,<span class="hst">  </span>that greater love and kindness none e’er tasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">By him and his friendly kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>who thither with him came,</p>
			<p class="t0">And there were held in bondage,<span class="hst">  </span>how readily by them</p>
			<p class="t0">Was given what was left them,<span class="hst">  </span>that any from them wanted!</p>
			<p class="t0">By Hartmut and his followers<span class="hst">  </span>all that could be asked was gladly granted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun, the lovely maiden,<span class="hst">  </span>a friendly will e’er bore</p>
			<p class="t0">To Hildeburg of Ireland,<span class="hst">  </span>with whom, in days of yore,</p>
			<p class="t0">To wash upon the sea-sands<span class="hst">  </span>the clothes she oft was bearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween no pains she slighted<span class="hst">  </span>that Hartmut’s love her friend might now be sharing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun then bade her steward<span class="hst">  </span>a hoard of goods to take</p>
			<p class="t0">For those who shared her kindness.<span class="hst">  </span>Men of this would speak,</p>
			<p class="t0">And say in wealth to give them<span class="hst">  </span>she would ne’er be wanting;</p>
			<p class="t0">Heavy gold and silver,<span class="hst">  </span>and clothes, could she to all her friends be granting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Before his seat upstanding,<span class="hst">  </span>the Sturmisch lord was seen,</p>
			<p class="t0">Clad so well and richly<span class="hst">  </span>that never king nor his men</p>
			<p class="t0">Finer clothes or better<span class="hst">  </span>at any time were wearing.</p>
			<p class="t0">None long time were waiting<span class="hst">  </span>who hoped that day his kindness to be sharing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Above all others, Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>gave such clothing there</p>
			<p class="t0">That truly never better<span class="hst">  </span>a king was seen to wear;</p>
			<p class="t0">With gold and gems it sparkled,<span class="hst">  </span>o’erhung with richest netting:</p>
			<p class="t0">Such clothes with him he carried<span class="hst">  </span>when on his way to court he was forth setting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">In every one of the meshes<span class="hst">  </span>lay a costly stone,</p>
			<p class="t0">However one might name it;<span class="hst">  </span>thereby it could be known</p>
			<p class="t0">That in the land of Abalie<span class="hst">  </span>the gems therein were fitted.</p>
			<p class="t0">To Wâ-te and his followers<span class="hst">  </span>all gave the hand, and them with thanks they greeted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">None of those there gathered,<span class="hst">  </span>who saw the clothes that day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Could of the brave old Wâ-te<span class="hst">  </span>this truth indeed gainsay,—</p>
			<p class="t0">That beyond the gifts of princes<span class="hst">  </span>his were far outreaching.</p>
			<p class="t0">Of wealth he soon was master<span class="hst">  </span>who for these gifts his hand was now outstretching.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Willingly did Irold<span class="hst">  </span>let them see his mind,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he to none was grudging<span class="hst">  </span>gifts of any kind.</p>
			<p class="t0">Good care of Hilda’s riches<span class="hst">  </span>was Fru-te ever taking:</p>
			<p class="t0">He was a faithful steward,<span class="hst">  </span>and long of him thereafter men were speaking.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The high times now were ended,<span class="hst">  </span>and all their leave would take.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then ’twas allowed to Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>as well his worth bespake,</p>
			<p class="t0">His peace to gain forever;<span class="hst">  </span>to this Gu-drun had brought him.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then for their home they started;<span class="hst">  </span>each happier went than he had erst bethought him.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">With friendly love, Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>bade them all farewell;</p>
			<p class="t0">With her, Gu-drun and Hildeburg<span class="hst">  </span>went, with kind goodwill,</p>
			<p class="t0">Far beyond the castle,<span class="hst">  </span>with all their maids-in-waiting.</p>
			<p class="t0">There took they leave of Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>when he at last was on his way forth setting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">A guard Queen Hilda gave them<span class="hst">  </span>across the land and sea;</p>
			<p class="t0">Great was the host that Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>and Ortwin now set free,</p>
			<p class="t0">Whom, long held in bondage,<span class="hst">  </span>they now were homeward sending;</p>
			<p class="t0">Full a thousand followers<span class="hst">  </span>Hartmut brought to his land when the war was ending.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Everywhere the ladies<span class="hst">  </span>one another kissed.</p>
			<p class="t0">Many now were sundered<span class="hst">  </span>who long each other missed,</p>
			<p class="t0">And nevermore thereafter<span class="hst">  </span>might again be meeting.</p>
			<p class="t0">The high-bred Ortwin and Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>went with them to the boats that for them were waiting.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold must be their leader,<span class="hst">  </span>while they did homeward fare.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then by the king ’twas bidden<span class="hst">  </span>that he the word should bear</p>
			<p class="t0">To Horant, lord of Denmark,<span class="hst">  </span>how they the land were leaving:</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon Irold to the warriors<span class="hst">  </span>guidance and guard unto their homes was giving.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">The time, or late or early,<span class="hst">  </span>in truth I cannot tell,</p>
			<p class="t0">When they for their home in Kassian<span class="hst">  </span>did at last set sail.</p>
			<p class="t0">The folk, now faring thither,<span class="hst">  </span>were nought but gladness showing;</p>
			<p class="t0">After many sorrows,<span class="hst">  </span>God on them was fullest bliss bestowing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Irold said to Horant,<span class="hst">  </span>when he reached the Norman land,</p>
			<p class="t0">That he by the king was bidden<span class="hst">  </span>homeward to lead the band.</p>
			<p class="t0">“To leave to them their kingdom,”<span class="hst">  </span>he answered, “it is fitting,</p>
			<p class="t0">They home have come so gladly;<span class="hst">  </span>I, too, to see my land with pain am waiting.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then they welcomed Hartmut,<span class="hst">  </span>and to him his land did leave;</p>
			<p class="t0">But how he swayed his kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>I now no knowledge have.</p>
			<p class="t0">With all his friends, then Horant<span class="hst">  </span>quickly homeward hasted,</p>
			<p class="t0">And left the land behind them;<span class="hst">  </span>Denmark they reached, nor many days they wasted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">There we now will leave them,<span class="hst">  </span>and only this will say:</p>
			<p class="t0">That never from a wedding<span class="hst">  </span>homeward took their way</p>
			<p class="t0">Happier knights and kinsmen<span class="hst">  </span>than now from there were going:</p>
			<p class="t0">Only the men of Karadie<span class="hst">  </span>tarried still in the land, their gladness showing.</p>
		</div>
		<h2 id="c32">Tale the Thirty-Second.<br/><span class="small">HOW THEY ALL WENT TO THEIR HOMES.</span></h2>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Now with the friendly Hegelings<span class="hst">  </span>none would tarry more.</p>
			<p class="t0">Soon on the way to Alzabie<span class="hst">  </span>they Herwic’s sister bore,</p>
			<p class="t0">Shouting all for gladness<span class="hst">  </span>that they the maid were bringing;</p>
			<p class="t0">While, on their watery pathway,<span class="hst">  </span>with proud and happy hearts, the knights were singing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Queen Hilda gave, at parting,<span class="hst">  </span>a kind farewell to them.</p>
			<p class="t0">Tho’ rich were Herwic’s followers<span class="hst">  </span>when first to her they came,</p>
			<p class="t0">Yet gifts she gave full many<span class="hst">  </span>to them, when homeward faring.</p>
			<p class="t0">When one is seen so lavish,<span class="hst">  </span>the name of a wonder-worker is he rightly bearing.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Gu-drun then spake to her mother:<span class="hst">  </span>“May blessings on you be!</p>
			<p class="t0">Mourn not for the fallen;<span class="hst">  </span>by both my lord and me</p>
			<p class="t0">Shall love to you be given:<span class="hst">  </span>no more you need be feeling</p>
			<p class="t0">Heaviness or sorrow;<span class="hst">  </span>your woes shall Herwic’s kindness now be healing.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her Queen Hilda answered:<span class="hst">  </span>“Dearest daughter mine,</p>
			<p class="t0">If you would make me happy,<span class="hst">  </span>henceforth must friends of thine</p>
			<p class="t0">Come to the land of the Hegeling<span class="hst">  </span>thrice to see me yearly;</p>
			<p class="t0">Else must I greatly sorrow,<span class="hst">  </span>and never can bear the loss I feel so nearly.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Then said Gu-drun, the high-born:<span class="hst">  </span>“Mother, it shall be done.”</p>
			<p class="t0">At once, with smiles and weeping,<span class="hst">  </span>and glances backward thrown,</p>
			<p class="t0">She left the castle of Matelan,<span class="hst">  </span>with many a friendly maiden.</p>
			<p class="t0">Her sorrows now were ended:<span class="hst">  </span>nought before did ever maids so gladden.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Hither men brought horses,<span class="hst">  </span>saddled and fitly bred,</p>
			<p class="t0">To bear her hence with her maidens;<span class="hst">  </span>these their keepers led:</p>
			<p class="t0">Light were all the breastplates,<span class="hst">  </span>and golden-red each bridle.</p>
			<p class="t0">I ween the ladies wished not<span class="hst">  </span>longer far from home to linger idle.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Many, with hair down-flowing,<span class="hst">  </span>and decked with gold, rode there;</p>
			<p class="t0">Methinks from tears and sorrow<span class="hst">  </span>none could then forbear,</p>
			<p class="t0">Who must at last from Ortrun<span class="hst">  </span>and from her maids be parted.</p>
			<p class="t0">Should Ortrun be unhappy,<span class="hst">  </span>Gu-drun would then be sad and heavy-hearted.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortrun, betrothed to Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>then her thanks did give</p>
			<p class="t0">To fair Gu-drun, the queenly,<span class="hst">  </span>that she had granted leave</p>
			<p class="t0">To hold the Norman kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>to Hartmut, her knightly brother:</p>
			<p class="t0">“Gu-drun, may God reward you!<span class="hst">  </span>my cares are gone, I ne’er shall know another.”</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">To her mother Hilda, also,<span class="hst">  </span>Ortrun her thanks did say,</p>
			<p class="t0">That she in Ortland’s kingdom<span class="hst">  </span>the crown should wear one day,</p>
			<p class="t0">Together with King Ortwin,<span class="hst">  </span>and there be called his lady.</p>
			<p class="t0">Then said to her Queen Hilda<span class="hst">  </span>that she to grant her this was ever ready.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="verse">
			<p class="t0">Ortwin then and Herwic<span class="hst">  </span>each to the other swore,</p>
			<p class="t0">With strong and steady friendship,<span class="hst">  </span>that they forevermore</p>
			<p class="t0">Would sway with right and honor<span class="hst">  </span>the lands to them belonging,</p>
			<p class="t0">And ever would be earnest<span class="hst">  </span>to seize and slay whoe’er was either wronging.</p>
		</div>