<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Names of Places</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="introduction-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Names of Places</h2>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Abakie</dfn>⁠—an imaginary Eastern land, subject to Siegfried.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Abalie</dfn>⁠—an Eastern land, noted for gems and cloths.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Alzabie</dfn>⁠—a fabulous Moorland city, the residence of Siegfried.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Amile</dfn>⁠—an imaginary Eastern land, the home of mermaids.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Araby</dfn>⁠—a land whence came fine clothes and treasures.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Ballian</dfn>⁠—Ballyghan, Hagen’s chief city in Ireland.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Daneland</dfn>⁠—not the present Denmark, but, in the ninth century, the seat of the Danes in Friesland, near the mouth of the Scheldt.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Dietmarsch</dfn>⁠—a province subject to Hettel.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Friesland</dfn>⁠—subject to Hettel, and held in fief by Morunc and Irold.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Galeis</dfn>⁠—a land whose people are friendly to Herwic.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Galicia</dfn>⁠—Portugal, the home of Hildeburg.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Garadie</dfn>⁠—an indeterminate country, near Ireland.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Givers</dfn>⁠—a fabulous land, subject to Horant.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Gulstred</dfn>⁠—a place in the West.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Hegeling</dfn>⁠—the name of a people on the North Sea, in Holland, governed by Hettel.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Holstein</dfn>⁠—variously mentioned as subject to Fru-te, to Irolt, and to Ortwin.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Icaria</dfn>⁠—a fabulous land whose people are allies of Siegfried of Moorland.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Ireland</dfn>⁠—The situation seems sometimes to correspond with the modern Ireland, and sometimes to a part of Holland. There is a place in Texel, at the present day, named Eijerland.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Iserland</dfn>⁠—the home of one of Gudrun’s maiden companions.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Kampalia</dfn>⁠—a fabulous land noted for rich clothing.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Kampatille</dfn>⁠—Hettel’s castle, also called Matelan.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Karadie</dfn>⁠—a land belonging to Siegfried of Moorland.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Kassian</dfn>⁠—the chief city and castle of Normandy.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Matelan</dfn>⁠—see Kampatille.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Moorland</dfn>⁠—the kingdom of Siegfried; owing to the love of the marvelous in antiquity, regarded by the poet as the land of the Moors, but probably a low country near the North Sea.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Nifland</dfn>⁠—“the land of fogs,” on the lower Rhine, the home of the Nibelungen.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Normandy</dfn> or <dfn>Ormanie</dfn>⁠—may be the country now known as Normandy, or is perhaps a region near the mouth of the Scheldt, where the name Ormans-kapelle occurs in an ancient map.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Ortland</dfn>⁠—probably Jutland, under the rule of Ortwin.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Salme</dfn>⁠—a fabulous country.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Sealand</dfn>⁠—Herwic’s kingdom, not the Danish Zealand, but probably the sea-lands of Friesland.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Scotland</dfn>⁠—spoken of as belonging to Norway.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Sturmland</dfn>⁠—subject to Wâ-te, adjoining Herwic’s kingdom.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Waleis</dfn>⁠—the western limit of Hettel’s kingdom, by some supposed to be Wales, but generally thought to be the country near the mouth of the river Waal in Holland.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><dfn>Wulpensand</dfn>⁠—an island at the mouth of the Scheldt.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
