<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XII: How Herwic Made War on Hettel, and How Gudrun Was Betrothed to Him</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Herwic Made War on Hettel, and How Gudrun Was Betrothed to Him</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Herwic, being forbidden by Hettel to woo his daughter, invades his kingdom, and, after a battle, Gu-drun, with Hettel’s consent, is betrothed to him.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>What more befell young Hartmut</span>
					<span>we now forbear to say.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the brave King Herwic</span>
					<span>a weight of sorrow lay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As great as that of Hartmut,</span>
					<span>for love of the high-born lady.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He, with all his kinsmen,</span>
					<span>to woo Gu-drun, as best they might, made ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Near her he was dwelling,</span>
					<span>and there he held his land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand times though daily</span>
					<span>he should send to ask her hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ever would his wooing</span>
					<span>be met with scorn and flouting;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But though he now was thwarted,</span>
					<span>later on her, as his wife, he was fondly doting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king forbade him longer</span>
					<span>to woo Gu-drun, his child;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then sent he word in anger</span>
					<span>that never would he yield:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel should see him coming,</span>
					<span>with men and shields, a-wooing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And this to him and Hilda</span>
					<span>would evil bring, that they would long be ruing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whose rede it was I know not,</span>
					<span>but thrice a thousand men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Showing thus their friendship,</span>
					<span>were soon with Herwic seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By them against the Hegelings</span>
					<span>harm erelong was plotted</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For the sake of the lovely maiden</span>
					<span>he fondly hoped would be to him allotted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Those who came from Sturmland</span>
					<span>the tale would not believe,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To those from Denmark also</span>
					<span>none the tidings gave;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Irold, lord of Ortland,</span>
					<span>soon the word was hearing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That now the daring Herwic</span>
					<span>for warlike ends to Hettel’s home was faring.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When ’twas known to Hettel</span>
					<span>that Herwic, fearing naught,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E’en now the land was nearing,</span>
					<span>and followers with him brought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then asked he of his kinsmen,</span>
					<span>and of the queen, his lady:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“What say you to the tidings?</span>
					<span>I hear that guests to our home have come already.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: “What can I answer,</span>
					<span>but that ’tis well and right,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When one such deeds is doing</span>
					<span>as befit a worthy knight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though good or ill it bring us,</span>
					<span>praise should they be earning.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Can aught amiss befall him?</span>
					<span>Herwic is wise, and aye for honor yearning.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His queenly wife said further:</span>
					<span>“Yet must we beware,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he may bring no burden</span>
					<span>unto our kinsmen here.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This have many told me⁠—</span>
					<span>’tis for the sake of your daughter</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he with many warriors</span>
					<span>has come into your borders, o’er the water.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel with his kinsmen</span>
					<span>had waited a little too long:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The wrath of young King Herwic</span>
					<span>now had waxen strong.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In the cool of the early morning,</span>
					<span>he, with followers daring,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Reached King Hettel’s castle,</span>
					<span>and later with his men the strife was sharing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>While yet the men were sleeping</span>
					<span>within King Hettel’s halls,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The watchman from the castle</span>
					<span>down to them loudly calls:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Up from your rest now, quickly!</span>
					<span>Arm yourselves and listen!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Foes from abroad are coming!</span>
					<span>E’en now, on their way, I see the helmets glisten.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From off their beds upsprang they,</span>
					<span>no longer dared they lie;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whoe’er there was among them,</span>
					<span>in rank or low or high,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must bear a heavy burden,</span>
					<span>for life and honor caring.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus the young King Herwic</span>
					<span>strove for a wife, the storm of warfare daring.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel and Queen Hilda</span>
					<span>had now to the window come:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Men they saw with Herwic,</span>
					<span>brought from a far-off home</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Among the hills of Galeis,</span>
					<span>where they had their dwelling;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These the mighty Morunc</span>
					<span>in Waleis knew, and oft of them was telling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The foes were seen by Hettel,</span>
					<span>thronging towards the gate.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Well Gu-drun’s brave father</span>
					<span>must fear to meet their hate,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As they were rushing onward,</span>
					<span>though high his heart was swelling:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Much they roused his anger,</span>
					<span>but them his burghers helped erelong in quelling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Armed to guard the castle</span>
					<span>were a hundred men or more;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel himself fought boldly,</span>
					<span>goodwill for this he bore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His lieges all were doughty,</span>
					<span>but yet they could not save him;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hard were the blows for Hettel,</span>
					<span>that in the fight the brave young Herwic gave him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon his foeman’s helmet</span>
					<span>whizzing blasts, fire-hot,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were struck by the daring Herwic.</span>
					<span>The many blows he smote</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun now saw with wonder,</span>
					<span>her eyes upon him feeding:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He seemed a knight most worthy,</span>
					<span>and love she felt, e’en though her heart was bleeding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel bore his weapon</span>
					<span>grimly ’gainst his foe;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of strength no less than riches</span>
					<span>he had, in truth, enow:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But soon he did unwisely,</span>
					<span>he pressed on him too nearly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And those within the castle</span>
					<span>saw the fight between them all too clearly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The sore-beleaguered dwellers</span>
					<span>the gates would gladly shut;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But now their losses told them</span>
					<span>that this would nothing boot:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Friends as well as foemen</span>
					<span>near the gates were thronging,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And great was the hope of Herwic</span>
					<span>to win the maid for whom his heart was longing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel then and Herwic</span>
					<span>against each other dashed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In sight of all their followers;</span>
					<span>flames shot out and flashed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On the bosses of the bucklers</span>
					<span>which they both were wearing:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But little while it lasted,</span>
					<span>ere knowledge of each other they were sharing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When Hettel saw in Herwic</span>
					<span>a warrior so proud,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And one so truly daring,</span>
					<span>he cried to all aloud:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Should any here forbid me</span>
					<span>that I with him be friendly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He knows the knight but little;</span>
					<span>deadly wounds he hews, in mood unkindly.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun, the lovely maiden,</span>
					<span>looked on, and heard the din.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Luck is round and rolling,</span>
					<span>like a ball, I ween;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And since to end the fighting</span>
					<span>to her it was not given,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She hoped that, when ’twas over,</span>
					<span>her father and his foe would find their strength was even.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She then began to call to him,</span>
					<span>from out the palace hall:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Hettel, my noble father,</span>
					<span>behold how blood doth fall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From out the hauberks flowing!</span>
					<span>Everywhere about us</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The walls therewith are spattered!</span>
					<span>A neighbor ill is Herwic, and harm hath wrought us.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“If you would grant my wishes,</span>
					<span>you now will be at peace;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Give rest to heart from anger,</span>
					<span>and let your fighting cease,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till I can ask of Herwic,</span>
					<span>and he to us be telling,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>About his land and kingdom,</span>
					<span>and where his nearest kinsmen have their dwelling.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the proud young Herwic:</span>
					<span>“Not yet may peace begin,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unless without my weapons</span>
					<span>I your love may win.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If rest a while be granted,</span>
					<span>the knowledge you are seeking</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I then will give you freely,</span>
					<span>and of my kinsmen will to you be speaking.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now, for love of the maiden,</span>
					<span>the strife did they forego.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then shook they off their armor,</span>
					<span>each battle-weary foe,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bathed in running waters,</span>
					<span>from rusty stains to free them.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They soon were cheered and rested,</span>
					<span>and none could grudge in happy mood to see them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A hundred knights with Herwic</span>
					<span>went from the field to find</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun, the Hegeling maiden,</span>
					<span>still wavering in her mind.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She, with other ladies,</span>
					<span>gave him welcome kindly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But the worthy, high-born Herwic</span>
					<span>hardly dared to think their wishes friendly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The fair and comely maiden</span>
					<span>showed the guests their seats;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The bravery of Herwic</span>
					<span>erelong with love she meets:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His high and noble breeding</span>
					<span>earned him kindest greeting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>’Twas thought Gu-drun and Hilda</span>
					<span>should grant his suit, without a longer waiting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To the ladies then spake Herwic:</span>
					<span>“I oft have heard it said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you of me speak lightly,</span>
					<span>and think me lowly bred:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your scorn may bring you sorrow,</span>
					<span>after all my striving;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The rich may from the poorest</span>
					<span>a blessing gain, the while with them they’re living.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: “Where is the maiden</span>
					<span>who could behold with scorn</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A knight who strove so bravely,</span>
					<span>or from his love could turn?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Believe me,” said the maiden,</span>
					<span>“I do not hold you lightly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Never maid more kindly</span>
					<span>has looked on you, or prized your worth more rightly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“If now my friends and kindred</span>
					<span>leave for this will give,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Even as you wish it,</span>
					<span>with you I will gladly live.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then with fondest glances</span>
					<span>he her eye was seeking:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In her heart she bore him,</span>
					<span>and owned the truth to all, no falsehood speaking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The brave and happy Herwic</span>
					<span>begged that he might dare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To woo the fair young maiden.</span>
					<span>Now to grant his prayer</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were Hettel and Hilda ready;</span>
					<span>but first must they be knowing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whether Gu-drun, their daughter,</span>
					<span>was glad or sorry for the kingly Herwic’s wooing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic was quick in learning</span>
					<span>how kindly was her mood:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now the brave young warrior</span>
					<span>before the maiden stood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In shape as fair and comely</span>
					<span>as if the hand of a master</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On a white wall had drawn him:</span>
					<span>while there he stood her love but grew the faster.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“If you your love will give me,”</span>
					<span>he said, “most lovely maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then shall my truest worship</span>
					<span>to you be ever paid;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Throughout my lands and castles</span>
					<span>to you there shall be given</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My kinsmen’s faithful service,</span>
					<span>and ne’er shall I repent that thus I’ve striven.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: “I give you freely</span>
					<span>the love for which you pray;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By all your toils and daring</span>
					<span>you well have earned to-day</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you and all my kindred</span>
					<span>foes shall be no longer.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now none can make me sorrow,</span>
					<span>and every day our bliss shall grow the stronger.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then they sent for Hettel:</span>
					<span>thus ended was the fight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon came he to his daughter;</span>
					<span>and many a faithful knight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Followed the king, their master,</span>
					<span>who unto him had ridden</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From all the Hegeling kingdom.</span>
					<span>Thus to the strife a long farewell was bidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now when Hettel’s kinsmen</span>
					<span>their wish for this did speak,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then asked he of his daughter</span>
					<span>if she would gladly take</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic, the knight so noble,</span>
					<span>who in his heart had set her.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the lovely maiden:</span>
					<span>“There’s not another I could love the better.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They then betrothed the maiden</span>
					<span>at once to the knightly king,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who in his land would crown her.</span>
					<span>This did gladness bring</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him, and sorrow likewise:</span>
					<span>ere many years were ended,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And she to him was wedded,</span>
					<span>good knights in stormy fight their lives defended.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To take the maiden with him</span>
					<span>Herwic now was fain;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But this her mother grudged him:</span>
					<span>thereby much woe and pain</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Came upon him later</span>
					<span>from foes as yet unheeded.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king was told by Hilda</span>
					<span>that longer time ere she be crowned was needed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They thought it best for Herwic</span>
					<span>to leave the maiden there,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While he with other women</span>
					<span>might pass the time elsewhere,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And wait to wed the lady</span>
					<span>until a year were ended.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This learned the men of Alzabie:</span>
					<span>to wait so long for her young Herwic ill befriended.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
