<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XIV: How Hettel Sent Tidings from Herwic’s Land</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Hettel Sent Tidings from Herwic’s Land</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hettel sends to announce to Hilda, his wife, and to Gu-drun, his daughter, his success in the fight with Siegfried. Hartmut, the Norman, takes advantage of the absence of both Hettel and Herwic, and invades the Hegeling kingdom.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel then sent tidings,</span>
					<span>to still their fears at home.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the fair and high-born ladies</span>
					<span>men with news did come,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That unto the old and youthful,</span>
					<span>throughout the stormy fighting,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Good luck had aye befallen;</span>
					<span>and now, with hope must they for them be waiting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He bade his men to tell them</span>
					<span>how Siegfried was besieged,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While he with all his followers</span>
					<span>war against him waged,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To help the lord of Sealand,</span>
					<span>loved by Gu-drun, his daughter;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That all, as they were able,</span>
					<span>daily fought for her, and for him who sought her.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel’s queen, fair Hilda,</span>
					<span>the hope began to have</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That luck would follow Herwic</span>
					<span>and all his warriors brave;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, as their worth befitted,</span>
					<span>all might well be speeding.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said Gu-drun: “God grant it,</span>
					<span>that they our friends may back in health be leading.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By Wâ-te’s men from Sturmland,</span>
					<span>the foes from Alzabie</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all who came from Moorland</span>
					<span>were kept away from the sea;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sadly must they tarry</span>
					<span>within the sheltering castle:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In Wâ-te and in Fru-te</span>
					<span>foes they had with whom they ill could wrestle.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Loudly swore King Hettel</span>
					<span>the castle ne’er to leave;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he and all his followers</span>
					<span>still to the end would strive,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till those to him had yielded</span>
					<span>who now the Moor befriended.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unwise had been their inroad,</span>
					<span>and this for them one day in sorrow ended.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile the spies of Hartmut,</span>
					<span>whom he had thither sent,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Tho’ little good they looked for,</span>
					<span>from the Norman border went;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ever to learn what happened</span>
					<span>they a watch were keeping,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And from the stormy warfare</span>
					<span>they hoped that Hettel might no gain be reaping.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now they saw that Siegfried,</span>
					<span>the Moorland king high-born,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was kept within the castle,</span>
					<span>besieged both eve and morn;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thence could he sally never,</span>
					<span>and this he knew with sorrow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His lands so far were lying,</span>
					<span>he little help from them could hope to borrow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The Norman errand-bearers,</span>
					<span>sent forth their watch to make</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By Ludwig and young Hartmut,</span>
					<span>to them now hastened back:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The happy news they carried,</span>
					<span>and soon at home were giving,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Hettel, the king, and Herwic</span>
					<span>were busy now, in warfare ever striving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To them the lord of Normandy</span>
					<span>thanks for the tidings gave,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And asked them: “Can you tell us</span>
					<span>how long those foemen brave,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men from the land of Karadie,</span>
					<span>will in Sealand tarry,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fighting ’gainst its warriors,</span>
					<span>till they, their wrongs avenged, of war are weary?”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One of them made answer:</span>
					<span>“The truth you now may hear:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There they yet must linger</span>
					<span>more than another year.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Never from their stronghold</span>
					<span>will the Hegelings free them;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They there so well are guarded,</span>
					<span>that on their homeward way none e’er shall see them.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the knight of Normandy,</span>
					<span>the daring Hartmut, spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“This frees my heart from sorrow,</span>
					<span>and hope in me doth wake!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If they are now beleaguered,</span>
					<span>then are we well befriended;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We must to Hegeling hasten,</span>
					<span>ere Hettel’s fight with Siegfried shall be ended.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig and young Hartmut</span>
					<span>had both the selfsame mind,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had they ten thousand fighters</span>
					<span>whom they at once could find,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun they might lay hold on,</span>
					<span>and to their home might carry,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before her father, Hettel,</span>
					<span>came back again from the land where he did tarry.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut’s mother, Gerlind,</span>
					<span>earnestly gave thought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wreak her wrath on Hettel,</span>
					<span>that he to harm be brought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Because her dear son Hartmut</span>
					<span>he shamefully had slighted.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She wished the aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>and Fru-te might be hanged, for the help they plighted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the old she-devil:</span>
					<span>“Good knights, your hire behold!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If you will now ride thither,</span>
					<span>my silver and my gold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That will I give you freely,—</span>
					<span>but women shall not share it.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I care not if Hettel and Hilda</span>
					<span>shall rue their wrong, and ne’er again will dare it.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Quoth Ludwig, Hartmut’s father:</span>
					<span>“We from our Norman land</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Forthwith must make an inroad:</span>
					<span>soon will I have at hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Twenty thousand fighters</span>
					<span>whom I for war will gather;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With these it will be easy</span>
					<span>to seize Gu-drun, and bear her from her father.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the youthful Hartmut:</span>
					<span>“Might ever this betide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Hilda’s lovely daughter</span>
					<span>I here should see my bride,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I would not take in barter</span>
					<span>for that a princedom fairest;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then might we here together</span>
					<span>pass our lives, each one to the other dearest.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Busily his followers,</span>
					<span>hour by hour, gave thought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How they could do his wishes.</span>
					<span>A host King Ludwig brought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To lead against the Hegelings;</span>
					<span>well were they outfitted.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How should Hilda know it,</span>
					<span>that soon thereby her welfare would be blighted?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The wife of Ludwig also</span>
					<span>helped them as she could.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this she plotted ever,</span>
					<span>that fair Gu-drun be wooed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, as the bride of Hartmut,</span>
					<span>to Normandy be carried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She did her best most busily</span>
					<span>that the maid one day should to her son be married.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig said to Hartmut,</span>
					<span>his well belovéd son:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Think well, O knight most worthy,</span>
					<span>no toil we now must shun,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until our foes are mastered</span>
					<span>and from their lands are driven.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Reward the guests who help us;</span>
					<span>to our men at home by me shall gifts be given.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>These they soon were sharing,</span>
					<span>all and every one.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Never yet in Suabia</span>
					<span>gifts so rich were known,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of steeds for war or burden,</span>
					<span>saddles, and shields fair shining;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween they were gladly given:</span>
					<span>Ludwig ne’er before such thanks was winning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Quickly all made ready</span>
					<span>to start upon their way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sailors were found by Ludwig;</span>
					<span>skilful men were they,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who the deep sea-pathways</span>
					<span>knew, and well could follow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hard must they be toiling</span>
					<span>to win their wages high upon the billow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now, in seemly measure,</span>
					<span>fit were they to go.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Throughout the lands and highways</span>
					<span>soon the news did grow</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Ludwig and young Hartmut</span>
					<span>home and land were leaving.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They yet would see much sorrow,</span>
					<span>when they erelong their Hegeling foe were braving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When to the shore they had ridden,</span>
					<span>ships were floating there,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That workmen well had builded,</span>
					<span>the knights away to bear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gerlind’s gold and riches</span>
					<span>had made them strong and steady.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor Wâ-te the old nor Fru-te</span>
					<span>of this knew aught, nor were for their coming ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With three and twenty thousand</span>
					<span>they sailed the waters o’er.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now for Gu-drun young Hartmut</span>
					<span>a weight of sorrow bore:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This, before his followers,</span>
					<span>to hide he was not earnest;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He hoped to meet King Hettel,</span>
					<span>and him to overcome in strife the sternest.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As yet they knew not fully</span>
					<span>how they his land could reach.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the sons of many a mother</span>
					<span>the raid did sorrow teach.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Near to the shores of Ortland</span>
					<span>the rolling billows bore them,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before ’twas known to Hettel:</span>
					<span>now Hilda’s castle rose in sight before them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors led by Hartmut</span>
					<span>were still twelve miles away;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet had they come already</span>
					<span>over the wide, deep sea,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the land of the Hegelings,</span>
					<span>and to its shores so nearly</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That castles, towers, and palaces</span>
					<span>in Hilda’s town they all could see most clearly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig, king of Normandy,</span>
					<span>bade that on the sand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They now should drop the anchors;</span>
					<span>he then gave word to land</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To all his men together,</span>
					<span>and bade them do it quickly:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They now had come so near them,</span>
					<span>they feared the Hegeling bands would gather thickly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then bore they up the weapons,</span>
					<span>with shields and helmets good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they had with them carried</span>
					<span>over the heaving flood:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They to fight made ready;</span>
					<span>yet they at first bethought them</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To send through the land their runners,</span>
					<span>to learn if friendly helpers might be brought them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
