<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XXIII: How Hilda’s Warriors Landed in Sight of Hartmut’s Kingdom</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Hilda’s Warriors Landed in Sight of Hartmut’s Kingdom</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Herwic and Ortwin, the brother of Gudrun, agree to go forward in advance to procure intelligence in regard to her and her maidens.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before the hill they landed,</span>
					<span>in sight of the leafy grove;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wary to be, and daring,</span>
					<span>them did it now behoove.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>First they dropped their anchors,</span>
					<span>deep the waters under;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In a lonely spot were they hidden,</span>
					<span>where none could see, nor at their coming wonder.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then from the ships, to rest them,</span>
					<span>they stepped upon the beach.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hey! what they had longed for</span>
					<span>was now within their reach!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A stream of pure, cold water,</span>
					<span>through the fir-trees flowing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ran down the wooded hillside,</span>
					<span>upon the wave-worn knights new life bestowing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>While the weary warriors</span>
					<span>were resting and asleep,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Irold soon had clambered,</span>
					<span>there his watch to keep,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Into a tree high-branching.</span>
					<span>He then began to ponder</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which way they should be taking;</span>
					<span>and, lo! the Norman land he saw with wonder.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Now, my youths, be merry!”</span>
					<span>thus cried the youthful knight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“My cares indeed are lightened,</span>
					<span>for now I have in sight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seven lofty palaces,</span>
					<span>with roomy halls wide-spreading;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before to-morrow’s midday,</span>
					<span>the land of Normandy shall we be treading.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the wise old Wâ-te:</span>
					<span>“Up to the sands now bear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All your shields and weapons,</span>
					<span>whate’er in fight you wear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let every one be busy,</span>
					<span>and let the youths be hastened;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At once lead out the horses;</span>
					<span>helmets and breastplates must with straps be fastened.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“And now, if any outfits</span>
					<span>are not good to wear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor meet for you in fighting,</span>
					<span>to that I’ll give my care.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The queen, my lady Hilda,</span>
					<span>has sent with us already</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full five hundred breastplates;</span>
					<span>these will we give to any who are needy.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Quickly were the horses</span>
					<span>forth on the sea-beach led;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all the showy horse-cloths,</span>
					<span>that should on them be spread,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were by the men unfolded,</span>
					<span>and laid on steeds in waiting,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To see which best beseemed them;</span>
					<span>and each then took the one he deemed most fitting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In leaping, and in galloping</span>
					<span>up and down the shore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They rode, and watched the horses;</span>
					<span>many, strong before,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now were dull and sluggish,</span>
					<span>nor longer quick at running;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Too long had they been standing,</span>
					<span>and Wâ-te had them killed, as not worth owning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Fires by the men were lighted;</span>
					<span>and good and hearty food,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The best that could be met with</span>
					<span>so near the shore and flood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By the tired and hungry wanderers</span>
					<span>soon was cooked and eaten.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They had not hoped beforehand</span>
					<span>that rest like this their toilsome life would sweeten.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Throughout the night they rested,</span>
					<span>till dawn of the coming day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Ortwin Wâ-te and Fru-te</span>
					<span>each his mind did say;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Talking aside on the seashore,</span>
					<span>many a threat was spoken</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Against their Norman foemen,</span>
					<span>who into the Hegeling castle erst had broken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Men must we now be sending,”</span>
					<span>to them young Ortwin said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Who shall tidings bring us,</span>
					<span>if they be not yet dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>About my long-lost sister</span>
					<span>and many a homeless maiden;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For when on them I’m thinking,</span>
					<span>my heart is heavy, oft with sorrow laden.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Together they bethought them,</span>
					<span>whom they hence should send,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By whom the news they wished for</span>
					<span>might with truth be gained,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And who could tell them rightly</span>
					<span>where to find the maiden;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By them, too, must the errand</span>
					<span>on which they came, from foes be wisely hidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the youthful Ortwin,</span>
					<span>who from Ortland came,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A faithful knight as any:</span>
					<span>“Myself for the search I name;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The maid, Gudrun, is my sister,</span>
					<span>child of my father and mother;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all, however worthy,</span>
					<span>am I more fit to go than any other.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the kingly Herwic:</span>
					<span>“I too will go with thee;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To live or die I am ready,</span>
					<span>seeking the maid to free.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To you she is a sister,</span>
					<span>but to me for a wife they gave her;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To her am I ever faithful,</span>
					<span>nor for a day uncared-for will I leave her.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then quoth Wâ-te angrily:</span>
					<span>“ ’Tis childish thus to speak,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brave and chosen warriors:</span>
					<span>such risks you should not seek,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And this for truth I tell you.</span>
					<span>Spurn you not my warning;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should you be found by Hartmut,</span>
					<span>you’ll on his gallows hang, your rashness mourning.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To him King Herwic answered:</span>
					<span>“Though good or ill betide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Friends should aye be friendly,</span>
					<span>standing side by side.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I and my friend, young Ortwin,</span>
					<span>will ne’er the task give over,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever shall befall us,</span>
					<span>and search will make till we Gudrun recover.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When now upon this errand</span>
					<span>both were bent to go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They sent for friends and kinsfolk,</span>
					<span>and did their wishes show.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They bade them to be faithful,</span>
					<span>and said the oaths then taken</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must never be forgotten,</span>
					<span>and they who went must never be forsaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Of your pledges I remind you,”</span>
					<span>the youthful Ortwin said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“If we, by foemen taken,</span>
					<span>should be in bondage led,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You with gold must free us,</span>
					<span>and so our bonds must loosen;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lands must you sell and castles,</span>
					<span>nor ever sorrow feel that thus you’ve chosen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“And, warriors brave, now hearken</span>
					<span>to what we more will say;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If foes our life begrudge us,</span>
					<span>and us in fight shall slay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Be not our death forgotten,</span>
					<span>let it on them be wroken:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your swords in Hartmut’s kingdom</span>
					<span>must make your daring there be loudly spoken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“This we further bid you,</span>
					<span>my good and well-born knights:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E’en though, with toil the hardest,</span>
					<span>every warrior fights,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let not those homeless maidens</span>
					<span>be by you forsaken;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the strife is settled,</span>
					<span>let not their hope and trust in you be shaken.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their faith then freely pledging,</span>
					<span>each gave to the king his hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all the best among them</span>
					<span>swore that home and land</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They nevermore would look on,</span>
					<span>but still afar would tarry,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until again to their homesteads</span>
					<span>they from the Norman land the maids should carry.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All of them were faithful,</span>
					<span>but yet were weeping sore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They feared the hate of Ludwig,</span>
					<span>and ills for them in store.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they could send no others</span>
					<span>they were deeply mourning;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all were sadly thinking,</span>
					<span>“No one now can death from them be turning.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All day they talked together;</span>
					<span>it now was near its end:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The sun, that low was sinking,</span>
					<span>thro’ clouds its beams did send:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erelong it sank o’er Gulstred,</span>
					<span>and there at last was hidden.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin and Herwic tarried,</span>
					<span>that night to go, by the waning light forbidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
