<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XXXI: How the Four Kings Were Wedded in Hilda’s Land</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-31" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How the Four Kings Were Wedded in Hilda’s Land</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A great wedding festival is held, at which the four kings, Herwic, Ortwin, Hartmut, and Siegfried, try to surpass each other in generous giving. Hartmut with his bride, Hildeburg, leaves for Normandy.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the kings were hallowed,</span>
					<span>as in days of yore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Also there were knighted</span>
					<span>five hundred men or more.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now in Hilda’s kingdom</span>
					<span>the folk high times were having;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It was at Matelan castle,</span>
					<span>before the walls where the sea the sands was laving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There the fair Queen Hilda</span>
					<span>to all fine clothing gave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How, in the sight of ladies,</span>
					<span>rode Wâ-te old and brave!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How Irold, too, and Fru-te</span>
					<span>of Daneland, rode before them!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One heard the spear-shafts broken,</span>
					<span>as these they lowered, and in the onset bore them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Lightly the wind was blowing,</span>
					<span>but the dust was dark as night;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet to the maidens’ clothing</span>
					<span>the knights gave heeding slight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Altho’ ’twas soiled and covered</span>
					<span>with the dust thick flying.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the ladies seated,</span>
					<span>riders bold in many a tilt were vying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now at length the maidens</span>
					<span>were left no longer there;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They, with the queenly Hilda,</span>
					<span>were led to a window near,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where the daring champions</span>
					<span>their eyes on them were feeding:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beside the four betrothèd,</span>
					<span>a hundred well-clothed maids they were thither leading.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Many wandering players</span>
					<span>there let their skill be shown;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The best that each was able,</span>
					<span>how gladly was it done!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When early mass was ended,</span>
					<span>upon the next day’s morning,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And God by them was worshiped,</span>
					<span>knights of the sword again to their games were turning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of uproar and of gladness</span>
					<span>where could more be found?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of many tunes and singing</span>
					<span>the halls gave back the sound.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until four days were over,</span>
					<span>there the high times lasted:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Well-born throngs were gathered,</span>
					<span>nor oft the hours in idleness they wasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>An open-handed giver,</span>
					<span>that day was Herwic seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He knew the wandering players,</span>
					<span>who there had come again,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were bent on growing richer,</span>
					<span>and well for this were striving;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic meant, in kindness,</span>
					<span>that all, while there, should gain an easy living.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>First the lord of Sealand</span>
					<span>flung his gifts around</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With willing hand so freely</span>
					<span>that thanks from all did sound</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who saw his love and kindness,</span>
					<span>or heard about it later:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In ruddy gold King Herwic</span>
					<span>the worth of full a thousand pounds did scatter.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Clothing, too, was given</span>
					<span>by his friends as well as kin;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Horses finely saddled</span>
					<span>many there did win,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who before not often</span>
					<span>on such steeds had ridden.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When this was seen by Ortwin,</span>
					<span>in giving then he would not be outbidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He, the king of Ortland</span>
					<span>finest clothes now gave:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since then, if better clothing</span>
					<span>knights did ever have,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Forsooth we cannot tell you⁠—</span>
					<span>it never reached our hearing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He and all his followers</span>
					<span>stood bereft, erelong, of much that they were wearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>No one now could reckon</span>
					<span>what store of clothing good</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was given by those from Moorland.</span>
					<span>There fine horses stood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon to be given also⁠—</span>
					<span>such indeed is the saying:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those who were to have them</span>
					<span>for better never hoped, nor e’er were praying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All were now made richer,</span>
					<span>both the young and old.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, too, was seen King Hartmut;</span>
					<span>nought would he withhold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As though his home and kingdom</span>
					<span>had not in war been wasted:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They saw him give so freely,</span>
					<span>that greater love and kindness none e’er tasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By him and his friendly kinsmen</span>
					<span>who thither with him came,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And there were held in bondage,</span>
					<span>how readily by them</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was given what was left them,</span>
					<span>that any from them wanted!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By Hartmut and his followers</span>
					<span>all that could be asked was gladly granted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gudrun, the lovely maiden,</span>
					<span>a friendly will e’er bore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Hildeburg of Ireland,</span>
					<span>with whom, in days of yore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wash upon the sea-sands</span>
					<span>the clothes she oft was bearing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween no pains she slighted</span>
					<span>that Hartmut’s love her friend might now be sharing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gudrun then bade her steward</span>
					<span>a hoard of goods to take</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For those who shared her kindness.</span>
					<span>Men of this would speak,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And say in wealth to give them</span>
					<span>she would ne’er be wanting;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Heavy gold and silver,</span>
					<span>and clothes, could she to all her friends be granting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before his seat upstanding,</span>
					<span>the Sturmisch lord was seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Clad so well and richly</span>
					<span>that never king nor his men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Finer clothes or better</span>
					<span>at any time were wearing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>None long time were waiting</span>
					<span>who hoped that day his kindness to be sharing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Above all others, Wâ-te</span>
					<span>gave such clothing there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That truly never better</span>
					<span>a king was seen to wear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With gold and gems it sparkled,</span>
					<span>o’erhung with richest netting:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such clothes with him he carried</span>
					<span>when on his way to court he was forth setting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In every one of the meshes</span>
					<span>lay a costly stone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>However one might name it;</span>
					<span>thereby it could be known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That in the land of Abalie</span>
					<span>the gems therein were fitted.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Wâ-te and his followers</span>
					<span>all gave the hand, and them with thanks they greeted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>None of those there gathered,</span>
					<span>who saw the clothes that day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Could of the brave old Wâ-te</span>
					<span>this truth indeed gainsay⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That beyond the gifts of princes</span>
					<span>his were far outreaching.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of wealth he soon was master</span>
					<span>who for these gifts his hand was now outstretching.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Willingly did Irold</span>
					<span>let them see his mind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he to none was grudging</span>
					<span>gifts of any kind.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Good care of Hilda’s riches</span>
					<span>was Fru-te ever taking:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He was a faithful steward,</span>
					<span>and long of him thereafter men were speaking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The high times now were ended,</span>
					<span>and all their leave would take.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then ’twas allowed to Hartmut,</span>
					<span>as well his worth bespake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His peace to gain forever;</span>
					<span>to this Gudrun had brought him.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then for their home they started;</span>
					<span>each happier went than he had erst bethought him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With friendly love, Queen Hilda</span>
					<span>bade them all farewell;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With her, Gudrun and Hildeburg</span>
					<span>went, with kind goodwill,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Far beyond the castle,</span>
					<span>with all their maids-in-waiting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There took they leave of Hartmut,</span>
					<span>when he at last was on his way forth setting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A guard Queen Hilda gave them</span>
					<span>across the land and sea;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Great was the host that Herwic</span>
					<span>and Ortwin now set free,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom, long held in bondage,</span>
					<span>they now were homeward sending;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full a thousand followers</span>
					<span>Hartmut brought to his land when the war was ending.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Everywhere the ladies</span>
					<span>one another kissed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many now were sundered</span>
					<span>who long each other missed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And nevermore thereafter</span>
					<span>might again be meeting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The high-bred Ortwin and Herwic</span>
					<span>went with them to the boats that for them were waiting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Irold must be their leader,</span>
					<span>while they did homeward fare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then by the king ’twas bidden</span>
					<span>that he the word should bear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Horant, lord of Denmark,</span>
					<span>how they the land were leaving:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon Irold to the warriors</span>
					<span>guidance and guard unto their homes was giving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The time, or late or early,</span>
					<span>in truth I cannot tell,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When they for their home in Kassian</span>
					<span>did at last set sail.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The folk, now faring thither,</span>
					<span>were nought but gladness showing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>After many sorrows,</span>
					<span>God on them was fullest bliss bestowing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Irold said to Horant,</span>
					<span>when he reached the Norman land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he by the king was bidden</span>
					<span>homeward to lead the band.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“To leave to them their kingdom,”</span>
					<span>he answered, “it is fitting,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They home have come so gladly;</span>
					<span>I, too, to see my land with pain am waiting.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then they welcomed Hartmut,</span>
					<span>and to him his land did leave;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But how he swayed his kingdom</span>
					<span>I now no knowledge have.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all his friends, then Horant</span>
					<span>quickly homeward hasted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And left the land behind them;</span>
					<span>Denmark they reached, nor many days they wasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There we now will leave them,</span>
					<span>and only this will say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That never from a wedding</span>
					<span>homeward took their way</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Happier knights and kinsmen</span>
					<span>than now from there were going:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Only the men of Karadie</span>
					<span>tarried still in the land, their gladness showing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
