<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XVII: How Hettel Came to the Wulpensand in Search of His Daughter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Hettel Came to the Wulpensand in Search of His Daughter</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Ludwig and Hartmut, on their way to Normandy with Gu-drun, stop at a desert island, called Wulpensand; Hettel and Herwic, in pursuit, reach the island, and a battle ensues.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig, king of the Normans,</span>
					<span>and Hartmut, too, his son,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now, with all their followers,</span>
					<span>far away had gone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And on a lone, wild seashore,</span>
					<span>after their toil, were resting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though many there were gathered,</span>
					<span>yet little happiness they then were tasting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>’Twas on a broad, low island,</span>
					<span>hight the Wulpensand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That now the brave King Ludwig,</span>
					<span>and they of the Norman land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shelter for men and horses</span>
					<span>had found unto their liking;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But a doom to them most woeful</span>
					<span>erelong must come, instead of the rest they were seeking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The very high-born maidens,</span>
					<span>torn from the Hegeling land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had been led out, and wandered</span>
					<span>along the barren sand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So far as ’twas allowed them</span>
					<span>to show their feelings freely,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They who had been stolen</span>
					<span>in sadness wept before the foeman daily.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Fires upon the seashore</span>
					<span>were seen on every side;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men from far-off Normandy</span>
					<span>were thinking there to abide.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gladly with the maidens</span>
					<span>would they seven days have rested,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And there have made them lodgings;</span>
					<span>but every hope of this erelong was blasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>While on this isle forsaken</span>
					<span>Hartmut now must stay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Loth were he and his followers</span>
					<span>the hope to put away,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which till now they fostered,</span>
					<span>that they for rest might tarry</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Throughout a week in the shelter</span>
					<span>whither they the maidens fair did carry.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>It was from far-off Matelan</span>
					<span>that Ludwig and his band</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fair Gu-drun had taken</span>
					<span>unto this lonely strand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor felt they now uneasy</span>
					<span>lest to their hidden dwelling</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te them should follow,</span>
					<span>and never harm from him were they foretelling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now saw King Ludwig’s sailors,</span>
					<span>tossing on the wave,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A ship with sails the richest.</span>
					<span>To the king they warning gave;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But when ’twas seen by Hartmut,</span>
					<span>and others with him standing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That on the sails were crosses,</span>
					<span>they said these must be pilgrims, bent on landing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On the waters floating</span>
					<span>three good ships were seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With new and well-made flatboats;</span>
					<span>they bore across the main</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those who on their clothing</span>
					<span>never yet wore crosses,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their love to God thus showing.</span>
					<span>The Normans must from them meet heavy losses.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As they the shore were nearing,</span>
					<span>one on the ships might see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Helmets brightly shining.</span>
					<span>No more from care were free</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>King Ludwig and his kinsmen,</span>
					<span>and harm their fears foreboded:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Look there!” then shouted Hartmut;</span>
					<span>“with grimmest foes of mine these ships are loaded.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The ships were turned so quickly</span>
					<span>that now men loudly heard</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rudders strained and cracking,</span>
					<span>held by those who steered.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both the young and aged,</span>
					<span>who on the sea-sands rested,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were indeed bewildered</span>
					<span>when to spring on shore the foeman hasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig and young Hartmut</span>
					<span>their shields in hand now bore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For them it had been easier</span>
					<span>to reach their homes once more</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If they had not too freely</span>
					<span>their rest on the island taken:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They had falsely reckoned</span>
					<span>that Hettel had now no friends, and was all forsaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig called out loudly</span>
					<span>to all his trusty men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(He thought it child’s play only</span>
					<span>that he before had seen,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Now with worthy foemen</span>
					<span>must I, at length, be striving!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He shall be the richer</span>
					<span>who ’neath my flag his help to me is giving.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon was Hartmut’s banner</span>
					<span>raised upon the shore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The ships had now come nearer;</span>
					<span>with spears the Normans bore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To reach the foe were easy</span>
					<span>from where they now were waiting:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween the aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>was ready with his shield, the foeman meeting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ne’er before so grimly</span>
					<span>did champions guard their land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Boldly the Hegeling warriors</span>
					<span>nearer pressed to the strand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon they met the Normans</span>
					<span>with sword and spear, undaunted;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Blows they freely bartered:</span>
					<span>such bargains cheaply given no more they wanted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Everywhere the Hegelings</span>
					<span>sprang upon the shore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>After a wind from the hill-tops</span>
					<span>was never seen before</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Snow so thickly whirling</span>
					<span>as spears from hands that threw them:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though they had done it gladly</span>
					<span>idle it were to shun the strokes that slew them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thick fly the spears on both sides:</span>
					<span>the time but slowly goes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till they on the beach are standing.</span>
					<span>Quickly on his foes</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sprang the aged Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>just as they were nearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His mood was of the grimmest,</span>
					<span>and soon they saw what mind he now was bearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig, king of the Normans,</span>
					<span>then at Wâ-te ran,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And hurled a spear well sharpened</span>
					<span>against the brave old man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The shaft, in splinters shattered,</span>
					<span>high thro’ air went crashing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For Ludwig drove it bravely;</span>
					<span>soon to the fight came Wâ-te’s kinsmen dashing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With a heavy stroke, old Wâ-te</span>
					<span>Ludwig’s helmet cut;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The edge of the sword he wielded</span>
					<span>the head of his foeman smote,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who beneath his breastplate</span>
					<span>a shirt of silk was wearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(In Abalie ’twas woven;)</span>
					<span>were it not for this, his end he must be nearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hardly from him could Ludwig</span>
					<span>with life and limb go free;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The spot he would fain be leaving,</span>
					<span>for Wâ-te was ill to see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he was roused to anger,</span>
					<span>and to win the day was trying:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Struck by his hand were many,</span>
					<span>who, brave in warfare, now on the field lay dying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Irold and young Hartmut</span>
					<span>each on the other sprang:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On either side their weapons</span>
					<span>on the foeman’s helmet rang;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Throughout the throng of fighters,</span>
					<span>all could hear it loudly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For bold in war was Irold,</span>
					<span>and Hartmut, too, was brave, and bore him proudly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic from the Sealands,</span>
					<span>a warrior strong and good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Could not reach the landing,</span>
					<span>but leaped into the flood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in the waves was standing,</span>
					<span>up to his shoulders hidden.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon to his cost was he learning</span>
					<span>how hard a task it is to win a maiden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They the shore who guarded</span>
					<span>their foemen thought to drown</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While in the waters struggling.</span>
					<span>Shafts at them were thrown,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many on them broken;</span>
					<span>but they, their foes now seeking,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon the sands were treading,</span>
					<span>and many a knight his wrath on them was wreaking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ere they had reached the shoreland,</span>
					<span>one saw the watery flood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dyed by the killed and wounded,</span>
					<span>in hue as red as blood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Everywhere, so widely</span>
					<span>the reddened waves were flowing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One could not shoot beyond them,</span>
					<span>how far soe’er he might his spear be throwing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Heavier toil and losses</span>
					<span>heroes never found,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And never so many warriors</span>
					<span>lay trampled on the ground:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Enough were they for a kingdom</span>
					<span>who lay, unwounded, dying.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The Normans who o’erthrew them,</span>
					<span>on all sides too, I ween, in death were lying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>It was to save his daughter</span>
					<span>that there King Hettel fought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all his kinsmen with him.</span>
					<span>On every side were wrought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By him and those who helped him,</span>
					<span>havoc and bitter sorrow.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dead on the Wulpensand</span>
					<span>were many bodies found before the morrow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Unto their lords all faithful,</span>
					<span>they strove upon the sand⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alike the men of Normandy</span>
					<span>and they of the Hegeling land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Warriors brave from Denmark</span>
					<span>fought with matchless daring;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He ne’er should wait their onset</span>
					<span>who much for his welfare or his life was caring.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Morunc and with him Ortwin</span>
					<span>boldly held their ground,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And for themselves won honor;</span>
					<span>nowhere could be found</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Men who greater slaughter</span>
					<span>wrought, with hearts undaunted:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The heroes twain, with their followers,</span>
					<span>gave full many wounds, with spears well planted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Proudly the men from Moorland,</span>
					<span>as I have heard it said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When from their ships they landed,</span>
					<span>the way to the foemen led.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel hoped, in his struggle,</span>
					<span>help from them to be gaining,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For they were daring fighters:</span>
					<span>one saw the blood beneath their helmets raining.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>How could he who led them</span>
					<span>have braver or bolder been?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That day he dimmed with life-blood</span>
					<span>many breastplates’ sheen;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried it was, unyielding</span>
					<span>in storm of battle ever.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How could the Danish Fru-te,</span>
					<span>or even Wâ-te the old, have shown them braver?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thickly hurled were lances,</span>
					<span>hither and thither thrown:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin, with his followers,</span>
					<span>in hopeful mood came on;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Helmets that day he shattered,</span>
					<span>blows upon them dealing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun was bitterly weeping:</span>
					<span>her women, too, were deepest sorrow feeling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The strife, on both sides, lasted</span>
					<span>throughout the livelong day;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Longing to reach each other,</span>
					<span>they crowded to the fray.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There to knights and warriors</span>
					<span>must the fight go badly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where the friends of Hettel</span>
					<span>to win his daughter back were striving gladly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The evening sun sank lower;</span>
					<span>and for King Hettel now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His losses grew the greater.</span>
					<span>King Ludwig’s men, I trow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Did their best in fighting,</span>
					<span>but could not flee the slaughter;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their foes they wounded deeply,</span>
					<span>and guarded thus Gu-drun from those who sought her.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The strife began at morning;</span>
					<span>by night alone ’twas stopped,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And steadily had lasted;</span>
					<span>they ne’er their weapons dropped.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The old and young together</span>
					<span>gained no shame in fighting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now the brave King Hettel</span>
					<span>forward pressed, the king of the Normans meeting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
