<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XVIII: How Ludwig Slew Hettel, and Stole Away in the Night</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-18" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Ludwig Slew Hettel, and Stole Away in the Night</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Ludwig, king of the Normans, slays Hettel, and his army steals away with the maidens in the night. The Hegelings discover their departure, bury the dead, and erect a hospital and cloister in their memory.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>High in hand their weapons</span>
					<span>Hettel and Ludwig bore,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Well had they been sharpened.</span>
					<span>Soon each knew the more</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who was now his foeman,</span>
					<span>such strength they both were showing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig slew King Hettel;</span>
					<span>and out of this our mournful tale is growing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When the lord of Matelan</span>
					<span>upon the field lay slain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon ’twas told to his daughter:</span>
					<span>loudly then began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun to mourn her father,</span>
					<span>so did many a maiden;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not one could stop her wailing:</span>
					<span>friends and foes alike were sorrow-laden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon as the grim old Wâ-te</span>
					<span>the death of the king did know,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He cried and roared in anger.</span>
					<span>Like to the evening glow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now were helmets blazing,</span>
					<span>beneath the strokes quick given</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By him and all his followers,</span>
					<span>who by their loss were unto madness driven.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>However hard their fighting,</span>
					<span>how could it bring them good?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Drenched was all the island</span>
					<span>with many knights’ hot blood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not yet the Hegeling warriors</span>
					<span>to think of peace were ready;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Away from the Wulpensand</span>
					<span>they only wished to bring Gu-drun, their lady.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In stormy fight the Waal men</span>
					<span>bewreked the death of the king;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To many a fighting Ortlander</span>
					<span>and hard-pressed Hegeling</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those who came from Denmark</span>
					<span>of friendship gave a token:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon these knights so daring</span>
					<span>found in their hands their trusty weapons broken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now to avenge his father</span>
					<span>Ortwin bravely strove:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Faithful to him did Horant</span>
					<span>and all his followers prove.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Night the field had darkened,</span>
					<span>the light of day was failing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then were given to many</span>
					<span>wounds from which the life-blood fast was welling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon, in the dark, on Horant</span>
					<span>a Danish follower sprang;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The sword that he was holding</span>
					<span>loud on the armor rang:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thinking he was a foeman,</span>
					<span>Horant at once upon him</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wrought most bitter sorrow:</span>
					<span>a deadly wound by that warrior brave was done him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When Horant saw that his kinsman</span>
					<span>beneath his blow lay dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then he bade that his banner</span>
					<span>be borne with his own o’erhead.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The voice of him who was dying</span>
					<span>told whose life he had taken</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With his hand so rashly;</span>
					<span>sorely he mourned the friend who never would waken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Loudly called out Herwic:</span>
					<span>“Murder here is done!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since we can see no longer,</span>
					<span>and daylight now is gone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We all shall kill each other,</span>
					<span>friends and foes together.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If this shall last till morning,</span>
					<span>two may be left to fight, but not another.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Where’er they saw old Wâ-te</span>
					<span>on the stormy fighting-ground,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No one there was willing</span>
					<span>near him to be found;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No welcome, in his madness,</span>
					<span>was he to any giving:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many a foe he wounded,</span>
					<span>and laid on the spot that he would ne’er be leaving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>’Twas well the foes were sundered</span>
					<span>until the break of day;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On either side the foemen</span>
					<span>near each other lay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wounded to death or slaughtered.</span>
					<span>Fast the light was waning,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not yet the moon was risen,</span>
					<span>and the Hegeling foe the field were nowhere gaining.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors grim, unwillingly,</span>
					<span>to the strife now put a stop;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hands of all were weary</span>
					<span>ere they gave the struggle up:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But, when the fight was over,</span>
					<span>they near each other loitered.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherever fires were burning,</span>
					<span>for each the other’s shields and helmets glittered.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig then and Hartmut,</span>
					<span>lords of the Norman land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Talked aside together.</span>
					<span>Then to his faithful band</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Spake the elder warrior:</span>
					<span>“Why be longer staying</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So near the brave old Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>who all of us is madly bent on slaying?”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The wily king then bade them:</span>
					<span>“Lie low, and be not seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With your heads upon your bucklers:</span>
					<span>you then must make a din;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so the men of the Hegelings</span>
					<span>my plan will not be knowing,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, if I now can do it,</span>
					<span>I with you all may hence unseen be going.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig’s men and kinsmen</span>
					<span>did as he had said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They upon their sackbuts</span>
					<span>and trumpets loudly played,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As if they, by their prowess,</span>
					<span>the land had gained them wholly.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig now to his followers</span>
					<span>showed his crafty plot and cunning fully.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then were heard, on all sides,</span>
					<span>mingled shouts and cries;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But wailing from the maidens</span>
					<span>was not allowed to rise:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All who would not stop it</span>
					<span>were threatened death by drowning,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To be sunk beneath the waters,—</span>
					<span>if they were sobbing heard, or loudly moaning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whate’er was owned by the Normans</span>
					<span>now to the ships was ta’en;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The dead were there left lying,</span>
					<span>e’en where they were slain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Friends were lost to many</span>
					<span>who, seeking, could not find them:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So few there were still living,</span>
					<span>that many an empty ship was left behind them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus unbeknown and slyly,</span>
					<span>sailed away o’er the main</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men of the land of Normandy;</span>
					<span>great was the women’s pain</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From kinsfolk to be sundered,</span>
					<span>and yet to hush their weeping.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of this the men knew nothing</span>
					<span>who now upon the Wulpensand were sleeping.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before the day was dawning,</span>
					<span>well were on their way</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They whom the Danish warriors</span>
					<span>had thought that morn to slay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Wâ-te bade that loudly</span>
					<span>his war-horn should be sounded;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He was in haste to follow,</span>
					<span>and hoped erelong to fell them, deeply wounded.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On foot and on their horses,</span>
					<span>the men of the Hegeling land</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All were seen together,</span>
					<span>flocking o’er the sand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To fight the fleeing Normans;</span>
					<span>never in this they rested.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig with his followers</span>
					<span>already far upon their way had hasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Many ships lay empty,</span>
					<span>and clothing there was found;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All about the Wulpensand</span>
					<span>’twas scattered o’er the ground;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many weapons also</span>
					<span>were seen, with none to bear them.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They had overslept their going,</span>
					<span>and never to harm their foes could they come near them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When this was told to Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>with anger he was torn:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How for the death of Hettel</span>
					<span>he bitterly did mourn!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And that on Ludwig’s body</span>
					<span>his wrath he was not wreaking!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Helmets there lay shattered;</span>
					<span>for this must many a woman’s heart be aching.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>How gloomily and sadly</span>
					<span>now, in angry mood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin was bewailing</span>
					<span>the loss of his warriors good!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He said: “Rouse up, my fighters!</span>
					<span>we may perhaps o’ertake them</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before they leave these waters;</span>
					<span>not far from shore we yet in flight may check them.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Willingly old Wâ-te</span>
					<span>would his bidding do:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fru-te the winds was watching,</span>
					<span>to learn which way they blew.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said he to his kinsmen:</span>
					<span>“What helps it though we hasten?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Mark what now I tell you:</span>
					<span>the thirty miles they’ve gained we ne’er can lessen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Moreover, we of fighters</span>
					<span>have not here enough</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That we in aught can harm them,</span>
					<span>e’en should we now set off:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Scorn me not,” said Fru-te,</span>
					<span>“and to my words give heeding;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What more to say is needful?</span>
					<span>Your foes you cannot reach, howe’er you’re speeding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Bid that now the wounded</span>
					<span>upon the ships be laid;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then on the field of battle</span>
					<span>let search for the dead be made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bid that they be buried</span>
					<span>upon this strand forsaken,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So friends may rest together;</span>
					<span>this good at least from them should not be taken.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All, standing there together,</span>
					<span>wringing their hands were seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this one sorrow only,</span>
					<span>would their lot have hapless been,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To lose the youthful maiden,</span>
					<span>Hilda’s lovely daughter.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How, when they saw her mother,</span>
					<span>if home they went, could news so sad be brought her?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to them said Morunc:</span>
					<span>“Would there were nothing more,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beyond our own sad losses,</span>
					<span>for which our hearts are sore!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Small reward will be given</span>
					<span>for the news we home shall carry,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Hettel dead is lying:</span>
					<span>far from Hilda fain would I longer tarry.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then went the warriors searching</span>
					<span>for the dead upon the sand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those they knew were Christians</span>
					<span>who lay upon the strand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As the Sturmisch Wâ-te bade them,</span>
					<span>were all together carried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then both the old and the younger</span>
					<span>chose a spot whereon the dead were buried.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the knight, young Ortwin:</span>
					<span>“Let us bury them here;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thought must we be taking</span>
					<span>to build a church full near,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they be not forgotten,</span>
					<span>while this their end is showing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For it shall all their kinsmen</span>
					<span>give of their wealth, each one his share bestowing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the Sturmisch Wâ-te:</span>
					<span>“In this thou well hast said;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We now should sell the horses</span>
					<span>and the clothing of the dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who on the shore are lying;</span>
					<span>so, since their life is ended,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shall many poor and needy,</span>
					<span>with the wealth they left, be holpen and befriended.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then asked the warrior Irold, if foes who there lay dead</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should also now be buried,</span>
					<span>or if wolves should on them feed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And hungry ravens tear them,</span>
					<span>that round their bodies hovered?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the wise they listened;</span>
					<span>none of the dead were left on the field uncovered.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When now the fight was over,</span>
					<span>and all were free from care,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel, their king, they buried,</span>
					<span>who for his daughter dear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon this barren seashore,</span>
					<span>e’en unto death had striven.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To others who had fallen,</span>
					<span>whate’er their land and name, was burial given.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>First, the men from Moorland</span>
					<span>each by himself they laid;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The same was done for the Hegelings</span>
					<span>found among the dead;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the Normans, also,</span>
					<span>gave they graves allotted:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alone was each one buried,</span>
					<span>if Christian he were or heathen, it nothing booted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Until six days were over,</span>
					<span>busy were they, at their best,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And never time were finding</span>
					<span>(for the warriors took no rest)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To ask for dead and dying</span>
					<span>the grace of God in heaven,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For sins of which they were guilty;</span>
					<span>that they for their misdeeds should be forgiven.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Saying mass and singing</span>
					<span>were later heard on the strand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Never was God so worshipped,</span>
					<span>in any other land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For the dead in stormy fighting.</span>
					<span>Wherever men were lying</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With their death-wounds smitten,</span>
					<span>holy priests they brought to shrive the dying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Many there did tarry</span>
					<span>to care for the churchly men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A deed of gift was written,</span>
					<span>wherein it could be seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How of land to the brothers</span>
					<span>three hundred hides was given.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Far and wide ’twas bruited,</span>
					<span>that well a godly house was builded, and had thriven.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All who there were mourning</span>
					<span>the loss of friends and kin</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gave of their wealth a tithing,</span>
					<span>women as well as men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For weal of the souls of any</span>
					<span>whose bodies there lay buried.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The cloister soon was wealthy,</span>
					<span>by the yield of three hundred hides, through toil unwearied.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now may God in his keeping</span>
					<span>have those who there lie dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And the holy men there dwelling.</span>
					<span>Those then homeward sped</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who still upon the Wulpensand</span>
					<span>were left among the living;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>After all their sorrows,</span>
					<span>they reached their fatherland, no more in warfare striving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
