<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XXVI: How the Hegelings Landed Near Ludwig’s Castle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-26" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How the Hegelings Landed Near Ludwig’s Castle</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">On their return to their friends, Herwic and Ortwin make known the result of their search. The Hegeling army arrives before the Norman castle, and is discovered by Ludwig and Hartmut.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>We ask you now to listen</span>
					<span>to a tale as yet untold:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin still and Herwic</span>
					<span>their way did onward hold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until they found their followers</span>
					<span>on the seashore standing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then ran these Hegeling liegemen</span>
					<span>to meet them on the sands where they were landing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Them they gladly welcomed,</span>
					<span>and bade that they make known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The news that they were bringing,</span>
					<span>and freely all to own.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>First they asked of Ortwin,</span>
					<span>if he could them be telling,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If still Gudrun were living,</span>
					<span>and if in Ludwig’s land she now was dwelling?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The knightly Ortwin answered:</span>
					<span>“Of this I may not speak</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To each and all that ask it;</span>
					<span>the truth I will not break</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till all are met together;</span>
					<span>then shall you be hearing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All that our eyes there greeted,</span>
					<span>when we to come near Hartmut’s walls were daring.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The word was told to others,</span>
					<span>and soon a mighty band</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of warriors brave and knightly</span>
					<span>around the two did stand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to them said Ortwin:</span>
					<span>“Sad is the news I give you,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, were my wishes granted,</span>
					<span>gladly I’d spare the tale, for much ’twill grieve you.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“List to what has happened,</span>
					<span>for wonders now begin;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gudrun, my long-lost sister,</span>
					<span>I, in truth, have seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with her also Hildeburg,</span>
					<span>erst in Ireland living.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he the tidings gave them,</span>
					<span>they thought the tale he told not worth believing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All then said together:</span>
					<span>“It is not well to jest;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For her we long have waited,</span>
					<span>and now our time you waste.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We hoped from Ludwig’s kingdom</span>
					<span>you would bring her sooner;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Ortwin and his followers</span>
					<span>belong the shame and blame for wrongs still done her.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Ask you, then, King Herwic:</span>
					<span>he, too, has seen the maid;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he can also tell you</span>
					<span>what wrongs on us are laid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Could you, my friends, bethink you</span>
					<span>of any shame that’s greater?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We found Gudrun and Hildeburg</span>
					<span>upon the seashore standing, washing in the water.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon were his kindred weeping,</span>
					<span>all who there were seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At this the aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>right scornful was, I ween:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Truly for women only</span>
					<span>is such behavior fitting;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Why you weep you know not.</span>
					<span>This, in a knight, one never should be meeting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“But if you are in earnest,</span>
					<span>to help Gudrun in her need,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The clothes that she has whitened</span>
					<span>must you in war make red.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erst white hands did wash them</span>
					<span>for men who must be bleeding;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So you now may help her,</span>
					<span>and soon the maid forlorn be homeward leading.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the Danish Fru-te:</span>
					<span>“How can this be done?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How can we reach their kingdom</span>
					<span>before our plan is known,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the men of Ludwig,</span>
					<span>and Hartmut’s knights, are learning</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Hilda’s friends are gathered,</span>
					<span>and toward the Norman land at length are turning?”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the aged Wâ-te:</span>
					<span>“Hear what ’tis best to do;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trust before his castle</span>
					<span>fitly to meet the foe,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If I may live to see him</span>
					<span>there before me standing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brave knights, your rest now leaving,</span>
					<span>soon on the Norman shore must you be landing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“The air is fresh and gladsome,</span>
					<span>the sky is broad and bright,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, well for us it happens,</span>
					<span>the moon will shine to-night.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From the sandy shore now hasten,</span>
					<span>my warriors bold and daring:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before it dawns to-morrow,</span>
					<span>we King Ludwig’s stronghold must be nearing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then they all were busy,</span>
					<span>when thus old Wâ-te spoke;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon their clothes and horses</span>
					<span>on board the ships they took.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All the night still sailing,</span>
					<span>towards the land they hasted;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And ere the morrow’s daylight,</span>
					<span>before the castle, on the sands they rested.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hushed were all by Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>throughout the warlike band,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as they to rest them</span>
					<span>lay down upon the sand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To his water-weary followers</span>
					<span>leave for this was granted;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their shields about them spreading,</span>
					<span>on them they laid their heads, for sleep they wanted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Whoe’er to-morrow morning</span>
					<span>hopes to gain the fight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must not,” said the aged Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>“oversleep to-night.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For the struggle now before us</span>
					<span>we hardly can be waiting;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as morning lightens,</span>
					<span>then, good knights, the foe must we be meeting.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Further I give you warning:</span>
					<span>whoe’er my horn shall hear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Along the seashore sounded,</span>
					<span>soon as it meets his ear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let him at once make ready</span>
					<span>the foeman to be meeting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When I shall blow at daybreak,</span>
					<span>no longer then may any there be waiting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“When I again shall blow it,</span>
					<span>let each to this give heed;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Quickly let his saddle</span>
					<span>be laid upon his steed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let him then be waiting,</span>
					<span>till I see ’tis daylight fully,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And the time has come for the onset;</span>
					<span>let none hang back, but meet the struggle truly.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To do as Wâ-te bade them</span>
					<span>their word they gladly gave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How many a lovely woman</span>
					<span>did he of bliss bereave!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For soon their dearest kindred</span>
					<span>unto death were wounded,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who now were only waiting</span>
					<span>until the horn in the early morning sounded.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“When you, my friends and kinsmen,</span>
					<span>thrice my horn shall hear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, seated on your horses,</span>
					<span>must you your weapons wear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus must you, brave warriors,</span>
					<span>wait, your steeds bestriding,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till me you see, well-weaponed,</span>
					<span>under the fair Queen Hilda’s banner riding.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now on the seashore weary</span>
					<span>lay they, one and all;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Very near were they resting</span>
					<span>to old King Ludwig’s hall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Altho’ the night had fallen,</span>
					<span>its towers they saw while waking;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The brave and fearless warriors</span>
					<span>in stillness lay, no sound or outcry making.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The early star of morning</span>
					<span>now had risen high;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then came a lovely maiden</span>
					<span>unto the window nigh.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She there was gazing skyward,</span>
					<span>to see when day was breaking,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she might bring the tidings,</span>
					<span>and rich reward from fair Gudrun be seeking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ere she long had waited,</span>
					<span>there dawned on the maiden’s sight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With its wonted gleam on the waters,</span>
					<span>the early morning light;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then the sheen of helmets</span>
					<span>and many shields there flittered:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Foes had besieged the castle,</span>
					<span>and all the sands below with weapons glittered.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Back then went the maiden</span>
					<span>to where Gudrun she found:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Arouse, my queenly lady,</span>
					<span>wake from your slumber sound!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The land is held by foemen,</span>
					<span>who will these walls be storming;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We have not been forgotten</span>
					<span>by those at home; our friends come hither swarming.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gudrun, the high-born lady,</span>
					<span>quickly sprang from her bed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, hasting to the window,</span>
					<span>to the maid her thanks she said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“For this good news you give me,</span>
					<span>wealth shall you be earning.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>After her heavy sorrow,</span>
					<span>now for her friends Gudrun was sorely yearning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Rich sails were seen to flutter</span>
					<span>near by upon the sea;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the high-born maiden:</span>
					<span>“Ah, wellaway! Woe’s me!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Would that I ne’er were living!”</span>
					<span>the wretched one was sighing:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Many a doughty warrior</span>
					<span>this day for me shall here in death be lying.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>While thus she was bewailing,</span>
					<span>nearly all still slept;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But soon was one heard shouting,</span>
					<span>who guard for Ludwig kept:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Be up, you careless warriors!</span>
					<span>your arms, your arms be taking!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And you, my king of Normandy!</span>
					<span>I fear that all too late you will be waking.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This the wicked Gerlind</span>
					<span>heard, as the warder cried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, while fast he slumbered,</span>
					<span>she left the old king’s side.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Up to the roof of the castle</span>
					<span>then at once she hastened;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She thence saw many foemen,</span>
					<span>and on her devilish heart great sorrow fastened.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Back again she speeded</span>
					<span>to where she found the king:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Awake, my lord, make ready</span>
					<span>for guests who followers bring!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now hem they in your castle,</span>
					<span>and well may they be dreaded:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That smile of young Gudrun</span>
					<span>will cost your knights a strife as yet unheeded.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Hush!” then answered Ludwig,</span>
					<span>“I will go myself to see;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We must all be bravely waiting</span>
					<span>for whatsoe’er may be.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then looked he from his castle,</span>
					<span>to see the foemen thronging;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His eyes by guests were greeted,</span>
					<span>on whom to look he never might be longing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before his palace waving,</span>
					<span>he saw their banners spread;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the old King Ludwig:</span>
					<span>“Let some one go with speed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bear this news to Hartmut.</span>
					<span>I for pilgrims take them,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To sell their wares come hither;</span>
					<span>before my hall a market would they make them.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then they wakened Hartmut,</span>
					<span>that he the tale might hear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Outspoke that daring warrior:</span>
					<span>“Let none be sad or fear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I see full twenty princes</span>
					<span>their blazoned banners bearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween these foes are coming</span>
					<span>to wreak the hate they long ’gainst us are wearing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
