<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale X: How Hartmut Sent to Woo Gudrun</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Hartmut Sent to Woo Gudrun</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hartmut, a Norman prince, son of Ludwig and Gerlind, hears of the beauty of Gu-drun, and resolves to woo her. Messengers are dispatched with letters, but receive a forbidding answer.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now in the land of Normandy</span>
					<span>the tale was widely told,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That never fairer maiden</span>
					<span>did any man behold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than was King Hettel’s daughter,</span>
					<span>Gu-drun, the high-born lady.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A king, whose name was Hartmut,</span>
					<span>to her then turned his love, to woo her ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gerlind, Hartmut’s mother,</span>
					<span>her wish to him made known,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he should woo the maiden;</span>
					<span>her word he followed soon.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>First they sent for his father,</span>
					<span>when they of this had spoken;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He bore the name of Ludwig,</span>
					<span>and in Norman lands he wore the kingly token.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the aged father</span>
					<span>rode to see his son.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of the end that he was seeking</span>
					<span>had Ludwig knowledge won;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But when to him he hearkened,</span>
					<span>and learned his wishes wholly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Evil he foreboded,</span>
					<span>yet still the youth’s fond hopes upheld he fully.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Who tells you,” said King Ludwig,</span>
					<span>“she is so very fair?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though she all lands were owning,</span>
					<span>the home is not so near,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherein the maid is dwelling,</span>
					<span>that we should go a-wooing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If we sent our men before us</span>
					<span>to ask her love, their task they would soon be ruing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did Hartmut answer:</span>
					<span>“For me ’tis not too far;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whene’er the lord of a kingdom</span>
					<span>no pain or toil doth spare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To win a wife and riches,</span>
					<span>he gains a life-long blessing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My wish, I pray you, follow;</span>
					<span>let men be sent, that they my suit be pressing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake his mother, Gerlind,</span>
					<span>of Normandy the queen:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Letters must now be written;</span>
					<span>let clothes, the best e’er seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With gold, to those be given</span>
					<span>upon your errand speeding;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They, too, must learn the roadways</span>
					<span>that towards the home of fair Gu-drun are leading.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake again King Ludwig:</span>
					<span>“Know you not full well</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Hilda, the maiden’s mother,</span>
					<span>did erst in Ireland dwell?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And know you not what happened</span>
					<span>to many a one who sought her?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her kin are proud and lofty,</span>
					<span>and now will scorn the love we shall have brought her.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then young Hartmut answered:</span>
					<span>“Though with a warlike band</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I afar must seek her,</span>
					<span>over sea and land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That shall I do most willingly:</span>
					<span>my heart to her is given,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And never will I rest me</span>
					<span>till I for Hilda’s daughter happily have striven.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Gladly will I help you,”</span>
					<span>King Ludwig then did say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Let this now make you happy;</span>
					<span>erelong, upon the way</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I’ll send twelve sumpter-horses</span>
					<span>bearing silver treasure;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That when they hear our errand,</span>
					<span>our wealth and worth they may more rightly measure.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By Hartmut then were chosen</span>
					<span>sixty men, to send</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To woo the fair young maiden,</span>
					<span>and help to him to lend;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With food and clothing also</span>
					<span>well were they outfitted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And on the road well guided:</span>
					<span>Ludwig was wise, and was in this foresighted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When everything was ready</span>
					<span>that soon the men would need,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then were letters written,</span>
					<span>sealed, and given with speed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both by brave young Hartmut</span>
					<span>and his queenly mother.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then from home they started;</span>
					<span>so proud a throng there never was another.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Fast they rode and steadily</span>
					<span>for many a day and night,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the land they sought for</span>
					<span>came at last in sight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And they might tell the errand</span>
					<span>they were thither bringing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Long was Hartmut waiting,</span>
					<span>while love and care were in his heart upspringing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Over land and rivers</span>
					<span>they took their toilsome way,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As far as in days a hundred</span>
					<span>a pasturing herd may stray,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the land of the Hegelings</span>
					<span>lay before them stretching.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their steeds were worn and weary</span>
					<span>ere they gave the letters they were fetching.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>At last they far had ridden,</span>
					<span>and to the sea had come,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the shores of Denmark:</span>
					<span>sadly they long did roam,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before they reached the kingdom,</span>
					<span>and its lord did know them;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now they begged for guidance,</span>
					<span>and men were bid the nearest way to show them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The news was given to Horant,</span>
					<span>the knight well-bred and bold;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now asked the errand-bearers,</span>
					<span>and the truth to them was told,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>About King Hettel and Hilda,</span>
					<span>and all they had been hearing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They saw the men of Hettel</span>
					<span>coming in throngs, their shields and weapons bearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Horant, lord of Daneland,</span>
					<span>then to his liegemen spake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bade for the errand-bearers</span>
					<span>a safeguard now to make,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And that the men of Hartmut</span>
					<span>should be by them well guided</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the court of his lord, King Hettel;</span>
					<span>they grudged no toil, and well his bidding heeded.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When thro’ the Hegeling kingdom</span>
					<span>the heralds took their way,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So lordly was their bearing,</span>
					<span>that often men did say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“These folk are rich and mighty,</span>
					<span>whatever they are seeking.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The news to the king was carried,</span>
					<span>and soon to him all men the tale were speaking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To all the guests from Normandy</span>
					<span>were lodgings given there;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king now bade his liegemen</span>
					<span>to wait on them with care.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He knew not yet their errand,</span>
					<span>and why to him they had ridden;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But on the twelfth day, early,</span>
					<span>young Hartmut’s men before the king were bidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>An earl there was among them;</span>
					<span>how well his breeding showed!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon their clothing also</span>
					<span>were praises high bestowed;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They rode the best of horses</span>
					<span>on which men e’er were seated,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And before the king they gathered,</span>
					<span>in fairest guise, that well they might be greeted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king gave kindly welcome,</span>
					<span>as also did his men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until their wooing errand</span>
					<span>was unto him made plain:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then were they ill-treated,</span>
					<span>and knew the king’s hard feeling.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween the mighty Hettel</span>
					<span>to grant young Hartmut’s wish would ne’er be willing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One who in that was skilful</span>
					<span>to the king the letters read;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But he was greatly angered</span>
					<span>that they to court were led</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By the good and upright Horant,</span>
					<span>a knight so brave and noble;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, had they not his friendship,</span>
					<span>they had not left the king without more trouble.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake to them King Hettel:</span>
					<span>“No good to you ’twill bring</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you were sent a-wooing</span>
					<span>by Hartmut, your lord and king.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To pay for this full dearly</span>
					<span>you may well be fearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your kingly master’s wishes</span>
					<span>both I and Lady Hilda are wroth at hearing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One among them answered:</span>
					<span>“Hartmut makes it known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That much he loves the maiden;</span>
					<span>and if to wear the crown</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In Normandy she deigneth,</span>
					<span>before his friends there living,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he, a knight all spotless,</span>
					<span>will rightly earn the love she shall be giving.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then quoth the Lady Hilda:</span>
					<span>“How can she be his wife?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A hundred and three of his castles</span>
					<span>his father held in fief,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Within the land of Cardigan,</span>
					<span>from Hagen, my noble sire;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It ill becomes my kinsmen</span>
					<span>to be King Ludwig’s vassals, or owe him hire.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Ludwig dwelt in Scotland,</span>
					<span>and there it erst befell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That a brother of King Otto</span>
					<span>did wrong to Ludwig deal:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both were Hagen’s vassals,</span>
					<span>and of him their lands had taken;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thus my father’s friendship</span>
					<span>for him was lost, and hate instead did waken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Say you now to Hartmut</span>
					<span>she ne’er his wife shall be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your lord is not so worthy</span>
					<span>that he to boast is free,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he doth love my daughter,</span>
					<span>and she doth not disdain him;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bid him elsewhere be looking,</span>
					<span>if he be fain a queen for his land to gain him.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The heralds’ hearts were heavy;</span>
					<span>’twas not for their good name</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they, for miles full many,</span>
					<span>in sorrow and in shame,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Back to their homes in Normandy</span>
					<span>this news must carry sadly.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut, as well as Ludwig,</span>
					<span>was vexed that they herein were foiled so badly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Forthwith to them said Hartmut:</span>
					<span>“Tell me now the truth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The grand-daughter of Hagen</span>
					<span>have you seen, forsooth?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Is the maid, Gu-drun, as lovely</span>
					<span>as men have here been saying?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>May God bring shame to Hettel,</span>
					<span>that he my suit with such ill-will is paying!”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the earl thus answered:</span>
					<span>“This can I truly say⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whoe’er shall see the maiden</span>
					<span>must feel her charms and sway;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Above all maids and women,</span>
					<span>her worth is past the telling.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then quoth the kingly Hartmut:</span>
					<span>“To live without her ne’er shall I be willing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whereon his mother, Gerlind,</span>
					<span>sadly thus did say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With tears her lot bewailing:</span>
					<span>“My son, oh, lack-a-day!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alas that e’er the heralds</span>
					<span>to win the maiden started!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If we at home had kept them,</span>
					<span>e’en to this day had I been still light-hearted.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
