<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XXXII: How They All Went to Their Homes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-32" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How They All Went to Their Homes</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Siegfried, king of Moorland, goes home, taking his bride, Herwic’s sister. Herwic returns to his home with Gu-drun, after she has bidden farewell to her mother, Hilda, and to her brother, Ortwin, and Ortrun, his wife.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now with the friendly Hegelings</span>
					<span>none would tarry more.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon on the way to Alzabie</span>
					<span>they Herwic’s sister bore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shouting all for gladness</span>
					<span>that they the maid were bringing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While, on their watery pathway,</span>
					<span>with proud and happy hearts, the knights were singing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Queen Hilda gave, at parting,</span>
					<span>a kind farewell to them.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Tho’ rich were Herwic’s followers</span>
					<span>when first to her they came,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet gifts she gave full many</span>
					<span>to them, when homeward faring.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When one is seen so lavish,</span>
					<span>the name of a wonder-worker is he rightly bearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun then spake to her mother:</span>
					<span>“May blessings on you be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Mourn not for the fallen;</span>
					<span>by both my lord and me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shall love to you be given:</span>
					<span>no more you need be feeling</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Heaviness or sorrow;</span>
					<span>your woes shall Herwic’s kindness now be healing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To her Queen Hilda answered:</span>
					<span>“Dearest daughter mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If you would make me happy,</span>
					<span>henceforth must friends of thine</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Come to the land of the Hegeling</span>
					<span>thrice to see me yearly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Else must I greatly sorrow,</span>
					<span>and never can bear the loss I feel so nearly.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said Gu-drun, the high-born:</span>
					<span>“Mother, it shall be done.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At once, with smiles and weeping,</span>
					<span>and glances backward thrown,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She left the castle of Matelan,</span>
					<span>with many a friendly maiden.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her sorrows now were ended:</span>
					<span>nought before did ever maids so gladden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hither men brought horses,</span>
					<span>saddled and fitly bred,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bear her hence with her maidens;</span>
					<span>these their keepers led:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Light were all the breastplates,</span>
					<span>and golden-red each bridle.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween the ladies wished not</span>
					<span>longer far from home to linger idle.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Many, with hair down-flowing,</span>
					<span>and decked with gold, rode there;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Methinks from tears and sorrow</span>
					<span>none could then forbear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who must at last from Ortrun</span>
					<span>and from her maids be parted.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should Ortrun be unhappy,</span>
					<span>Gu-drun would then be sad and heavy-hearted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ortrun, betrothed to Ortwin,</span>
					<span>then her thanks did give</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To fair Gu-drun, the queenly,</span>
					<span>that she had granted leave</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To hold the Norman kingdom</span>
					<span>to Hartmut, her knightly brother:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Gu-drun, may God reward you!</span>
					<span>my cares are gone, I ne’er shall know another.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To her mother Hilda, also,</span>
					<span>Ortrun her thanks did say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she in Ortland’s kingdom</span>
					<span>the crown should wear one day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Together with King Ortwin,</span>
					<span>and there be called his lady.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said to her Queen Hilda</span>
					<span>that she to grant her this was ever ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin then and Herwic</span>
					<span>each to the other swore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With strong and steady friendship,</span>
					<span>that they forevermore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Would sway with right and honor</span>
					<span>the lands to them belonging,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And ever would be earnest</span>
					<span>to seize and slay whoe’er was either wronging.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
