<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale I: How Hagen Was Carried Off by the Griffin</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Hagen Was Carried Off by the Griffin</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Sigeband, king of Ireland, after the death of his father, marries a princess of Norway, who bears him a son, Hagen. During the celebration of a court festival, Hagen, now seven years old, while outside the castle in the care of his attendants, is caught up by a griffin, and borne to his nest in a distant land.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In olden days in Ireland</span>
					<span>a king to greatness came</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who bore the name of Sigeband;</span>
					<span>Ger was his father’s name.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Queen U-te was his mother;</span>
					<span>she of a king was daughter;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>High was her worth and goodness,</span>
					<span>and well her love beseemed the lord who sought her.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The sway of Ger was mighty,</span>
					<span>as unto all is known;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He many lands and castles</span>
					<span>and lordships seven did own:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Four thousand knights or over</span>
					<span>he thence was often leading,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And wealth, and name yet greater,</span>
					<span>he daily won, with those who did his bidding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now the youthful Sigeband</span>
					<span>to his father’s court must go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he might there be learning</span>
					<span>all he had need to know⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bear the spear in riding,</span>
					<span>to thrust it, and to shield him,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That when he met the foeman,</span>
					<span>the better fame thereby the fight would yield him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>That age he now was reaching</span>
					<span>when he the sword might bear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all that a knight befitteth</span>
					<span>he learned a goodly share.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This from kin and vassals</span>
					<span>praise unmeasured brought him;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this he still was striving,</span>
					<span>and of the toil it cost he ne’er bethought him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A few short days thereafter</span>
					<span>death came among them all,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As even to men the greatest</span>
					<span>sadly doth befall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In every land and kingdom</span>
					<span>the truth of this we’re meeting,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And we, with heavy sorrow,</span>
					<span>such news ourselves must every day be waiting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sigeband’s mother, U-te,</span>
					<span>the widow’s seat must take;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her son, so high and worthy,</span>
					<span>left all things for her sake.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No whit he cared for wedlock,</span>
					<span>and had no heart for wooing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many a queenly lady</span>
					<span>at this was sad, young Sigeband’s sorrow ruing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A worthy wife to find him</span>
					<span>his mother him besought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So might he and his kingdom</span>
					<span>to greater name be brought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he with all his kindred,</span>
					<span>after their bitter sorrow</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For the death of the king, his father,</span>
					<span>might for themselves no little gladness borrow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The teaching of his mother</span>
					<span>he heard in kindly mood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And began at once to follow,</span>
					<span>as that of a friend one should.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The best of high-born maidens,</span>
					<span>’mong those in Norway dwelling,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He bade his men to sue for:</span>
					<span>to help in this he found his kinsmen willing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She soon to him was wedded,</span>
					<span>as hath of old been said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With her, among her followers,</span>
					<span>came many a lovely maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, from over Scotland’s border,</span>
					<span>seven hundred warriors fully;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They came with her right gladly,</span>
					<span>when the worth of the king was known to them more truly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Proudly their way they wended,</span>
					<span>as beseemed the maiden’s birth;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all the care they led her</span>
					<span>befitting his kingly worth;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hidden were the roadways</span>
					<span>by gazers without number,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who hasted to behold her;</span>
					<span>for three miles and a half the throngs the ways did cumber.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Where’er along the roadside</span>
					<span>the path with green was spread,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Flowers and grass were trampled,</span>
					<span>by crowds, with heavy tread.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It fell upon that season</span>
					<span>when the leaves are springing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in every copse and thicket</span>
					<span>all the birds their best of songs are singing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of simple folk and merry</span>
					<span>there rode with her enough;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While many loaded horses</span>
					<span>bore much costly stuff,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brought there from her birthland</span>
					<span>by followers of the maiden;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They came with her by thousands,</span>
					<span>with gold as well as clothing heavy-laden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On the shore of two wide marches,</span>
					<span>the dwellers by the sea,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As they saw the west wind waft her,</span>
					<span>gave her welcome free;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They found a seemly lodging</span>
					<span>for the lovely, well-born lady,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And brought her all things needful,</span>
					<span>by the youthful king, before, for her made ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The fair young maid they welcomed</span>
					<span>with knightly tournament;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not soon their games they ended,</span>
					<span>when on the spear-fight bent.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the land of Ger his father</span>
					<span>they bore her to be wedded;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She there was loved and mighty,</span>
					<span>and men to sound her name she never needed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All, as they were able,</span>
					<span>waited on the maid;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gaudy cloth for her saddle</span>
					<span>down to the grass was spread;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The horses’ hoofs were hidden</span>
					<span>by the housing, heavy drooping.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Aha! In mood how gleeful</span>
					<span>was Ireland’s lord, once more a blessing hoping!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When now the time was fitting</span>
					<span>that he the maid should kiss,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All crowded thick about him,</span>
					<span>in haste to see their bliss.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The bosses of their bucklers</span>
					<span>were now heard loudly clashing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Struck with blows together;</span>
					<span>each strove to shun the throngs, in uproar crashing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now with the dawn of morning,</span>
					<span>they sent out, far and wide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To give to all the tidings</span>
					<span>of the coming of the bride,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And that, with their master,</span>
					<span>they erelong would crown her.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His queen she was thereafter,</span>
					<span>and well she earned from him the honor shown her.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>It was not deemed becoming</span>
					<span>that he his love should plight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since she by birth was queenly,</span>
					<span>and he not yet a knight:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He first, before his lieges,</span>
					<span>must the crown be wearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To this his kinsmen helped him,</span>
					<span>and later of his worth were all men hearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He, with knights five hundred,</span>
					<span>then was dubbed with the sword;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever they could wish for</span>
					<span>was given them at his word⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both shields, and, for their wearing,</span>
					<span>every kind of clothing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The youthful king so dauntless,</span>
					<span>thro’ life, of fame and honor wanted nothing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For many a day thereafter</span>
					<span>his sway did Ireland bless,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And never did his greatness</span>
					<span>at any time grow less.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To all he freely listened;</span>
					<span>the poor man’s wrongs he righted;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Widely known was his goodness;</span>
					<span>no truer knight than he his word e’er plighted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His boundless acres yielded</span>
					<span>a full and ready gain;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His wife was known for wisdom,</span>
					<span>and worthy to be his queen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To hold her as their mistress</span>
					<span>full thirty lords it booted;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As long as the sway she wielded,</span>
					<span>her hand to each his lands and home allotted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She bore unto her husband,</span>
					<span>within the next three years,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A child to see most comely;</span>
					<span>(such is the tale one hears.)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When later he was christened,</span>
					<span>and they were told to name him,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They gave the name of Hagen;</span>
					<span>and never since, the tale of his life doth shame him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He had most careful breeding,</span>
					<span>and kindly was he nursed;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should he be like his fathers,</span>
					<span>he would of knights be first.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Watched over by wise women,</span>
					<span>and by maidens of early age,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His father and fond mother</span>
					<span>found in his face their glad eyes’ pasturage.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When now the boy, well fostered,</span>
					<span>to his seventh year was bred,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>’Twas seen that he by warriors</span>
					<span>by the hand was often led.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He was happy in men’s teaching,</span>
					<span>but was with women wearied;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All this he knew no longer;</span>
					<span>for, torn from them, he far away was carried.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whene’er to him it happened</span>
					<span>weapons at court to see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He understood them readily,</span>
					<span>and their wearer longed to be;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The helmet and ringed armor</span>
					<span>would he have put on gladly:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alas! not long he saw them,</span>
					<span>and all his hopes of fighting ended sadly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>While the kingly Sigeband,</span>
					<span>beneath a cedar-tree,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One day on the turf was seated,</span>
					<span>the queen said earnestly:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Although good name and riches</span>
					<span>we share with one another,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At one thing yet I wonder,</span>
					<span>and this from you I dare to hide no further.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He asked of her: “What is it?”</span>
					<span>Then said his helpmeet kind:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“It me doth sorely worry</span>
					<span>in body and in mind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And my heart, alas! is heavy;</span>
					<span>to my wish you give no heeding,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To see you ’midst your vassals,</span>
					<span>my beaming eyes with pride upon you feeding.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king to her thus answered:</span>
					<span>“How should it ever be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you have had such longing</span>
					<span>me with my knights to see?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I will strive thy will to follow,</span>
					<span>of this think not so sadly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ever to meet thy wishes,</span>
					<span>both care and toil will I give myself most gladly.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: “No man is living</span>
					<span>who owns such wealth, I trow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who has so many castles</span>
					<span>or lands so wide as thou,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With silver and gems so costly,</span>
					<span>and gold so heavy weighing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this are our ways too lowly,</span>
					<span>and nought there is in life to me worth saying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“When erst I was a maiden,</span>
					<span>and on Scotland’s soil drew breath,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(Chide not, my lord, thy helpmeet,</span>
					<span>but list to what she saith,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I there was daily seeing</span>
					<span>the liegemen of my father</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For highest prizes striving;</span>
					<span>but here such games we never see together.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“A king so rich and mighty,</span>
					<span>as you in name have been,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before his followers often</span>
					<span>should let himself be seen;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He oft should ride in tilting</span>
					<span>with other champions knightly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That both himself and his kingdom</span>
					<span>should seem more fair, and hold their rank more fitly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“It shows, in a lord so noble,</span>
					<span>a most unworthy mind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he has heaped together</span>
					<span>riches of every kind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If he with his faithful warriors</span>
					<span>to share them is unwilling:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When men in the storm of warfare</span>
					<span>deep wounds have had, how else can they find healing?”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said to her King Sigeband:</span>
					<span>“Lady, you mock at me;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In all these warlike pastimes</span>
					<span>I will most earnest be;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And for the strife so worthy</span>
					<span>my wish shall never waver:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No man shall find it easy</span>
					<span>the ways of well-born kings to teach me ever.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: “You now for warriors</span>
					<span>must send throughout the land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Stores of wealth and clothing</span>
					<span>must be given with open hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I too will send out heralds</span>
					<span>my kinsmen all to rally,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And to show them my good wishes;</span>
					<span>we then shall find our life to pass more gaily.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>At this the king of Ireland</span>
					<span>unto his wife thus said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“I yield to you most willingly,</span>
					<span>for men are often led</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By the wishes of fair women</span>
					<span>great feastings to make ready;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I therefore now will gather</span>
					<span>my brave and hardy kinsmen, and those too of my lady.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To him the queen then answered:</span>
					<span>“Sorrow no more I wear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Five hundred women’s garments</span>
					<span>I will give, to each her share;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To four and sixty maidens</span>
					<span>gay clothes to give I’m willing.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then the king did tell her</span>
					<span>high times he soon would hold, his word fulfilling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The sports were then bespoken:</span>
					<span>he bade his men to send,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In eighteen days or sooner,</span>
					<span>to liegeman and to friend,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To say to all in Ireland,</span>
					<span>who would in his games be riding,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, after summer was ended,</span>
					<span>they should spend the winter, with him abiding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He bade his men make benches,</span>
					<span>so our tale doth run,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And for these, from out the wilderness,</span>
					<span>timber must be drawn;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For sixty thousand warriors</span>
					<span>seats must they make ready.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His henchmen and deft stewards,</span>
					<span>to do this work for the king, were skilled and speedy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thither men then hastened</span>
					<span>on many a winding way;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All were kindly cared for</span>
					<span>throughout their lengthened stay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now from Ireland’s kingdom,</span>
					<span>as the king had bidden,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full six and eighty thousand</span>
					<span>of warriors strong there to his court had ridden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From the store-rooms of the castle</span>
					<span>clothing now was borne⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All the gear they wished for,</span>
					<span>and all that could be worn.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shields were also given,</span>
					<span>and steeds of Irish breeding;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The proud and queenly lady</span>
					<span>bedecked her guests with all they could be needing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She gave to a thousand women</span>
					<span>costly clothes enow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And likewise to fair maidens</span>
					<span>what one to youth should allow⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Broidered bands and jewels,</span>
					<span>and silk that glistened brightly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The many lovely ladies,</span>
					<span>together standing there, were fair and sightly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To every one who wished it</span>
					<span>were given clothes well-made.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Horses were there seen prancing,</span>
					<span>by the hand of foot-boys led;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These light shields did carry,</span>
					<span>and their spears were seizing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>U-te, the queenly mother,</span>
					<span>was gladly seen, as she on the leads sat gazing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The guests by the king were bidden</span>
					<span>freely in tilts to meet;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The glitter of their helmets</span>
					<span>grew dim in the dust and heat.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The ladies, held in honor,</span>
					<span>near by were also seated,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where they the deeds of the warriors</span>
					<span>saw full well, and with words of wonder greeted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As oft before has happened,</span>
					<span>the show had lasted long;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king was not unwilling</span>
					<span>to be looked on by the throng.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This, meanwhile, to his lady</span>
					<span>happiness was giving,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As she, amidst her women,</span>
					<span>sat on the roof, and saw their earnest striving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When now her lord had ridden,</span>
					<span>as doth beseem a king,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He thought to end their onsets;</span>
					<span>some rest to them to bring</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He deemed not unbecoming;</span>
					<span>to stop the games he bade them.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then before the ladies,</span>
					<span>after their skill thus shown, he proudly led them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>U-te, the high-born lady,</span>
					<span>began her friends to greet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With those from far-off kingdoms;</span>
					<span>them as guests to meet</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The queen was truly willing;</span>
					<span>on them her glad eyes rested.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gifts of Lady U-te</span>
					<span>were not on scornful friends that evening wasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Knights and lovely ladies</span>
					<span>together there were seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The good-will of the master</span>
					<span>to all well-known had been;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In all their games and tilting,</span>
					<span>his kindness was not hidden.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Once more the guests, that evening,</span>
					<span>to ride in warlike strife by him were bidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their games and sports had lasted</span>
					<span>until nine days were gone;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They, as knights befitteth,</span>
					<span>their skill to the king had shown.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By the many wandering players</span>
					<span>the show was liked the better,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And they plied their work more briskly,</span>
					<span>and hoped that their reward would be the greater.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sackbuts loud and trumpets</span>
					<span>there might all men hear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fluting too and harping</span>
					<span>fell upon the ear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Some on the rote were playing,</span>
					<span>others in song were vying;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They, by their jigs and fifing,</span>
					<span>soon would better clothes for themselves be buying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On the tenth morn it happened,</span>
					<span>(now hark to my sorry tale,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, after all their pastimes,</span>
					<span>there rose a bitter wail.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>About these days so merry</span>
					<span>new tales were told on the morrow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And tho’ they now were mirthful,</span>
					<span>they came to know deep gloom and heavy sorrow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When the guests were seated</span>
					<span>beside their kingly host,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There came to them a player,</span>
					<span>and proudly made his boast</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he, before all others,</span>
					<span>(who should indeed believe him?)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was far more skilled in playing,</span>
					<span>and even the greatest lords their ear must give him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Outside, a lovely maiden</span>
					<span>was leading by the hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The little son of Sigeband</span>
					<span>who swayed the Irish land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With him were likewise women</span>
					<span>who to the boy gave heeding,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And friendly kinsmen also,</span>
					<span>who carefully taught the child, and oversaw his breeding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Within the great king’s palace</span>
					<span>was heard a din and shout;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All were there heard laughing,</span>
					<span>the roomy walls throughout.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The guardians of young Hagen</span>
					<span>crowded up too nearly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thus lost sight of the maiden,</span>
					<span>together with the child they loved so dearly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The evil luck of their master</span>
					<span>to him that day drew near,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And brought to him and U-te</span>
					<span>sudden woe and fear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sent by the wicked devil,</span>
					<span>from afar his herald hasted</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To them in their happy kingdom;</span>
					<span>they were by this with sorrow sorely wasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>It was a strong, wild griffin</span>
					<span>had quickly thither flown;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From the little boy of Sigeband,</span>
					<span>who ever care had known,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Came ill luck to his father,</span>
					<span>who soon of this was tasting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His son, so well-belovéd,</span>
					<span>to him was lost, with the mighty bird far hasting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A shadow now came o’er them,</span>
					<span>from wings that bore him fleet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As if a cloud had risen;</span>
					<span>great strength had the bird, I weet.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The guests, in pastime busy,</span>
					<span>no thought to this had given,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And the maid, with the child she was leading,</span>
					<span>was standing now alone, unheeded even.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Beneath the weight of the griffin</span>
					<span>forest trees broke down;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now the trusty maiden</span>
					<span>looked where the bird had flown;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then she herself sought shelter,</span>
					<span>and left the child forsaken.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hearing a tale so startling,</span>
					<span>one truly might the whole for a wonder reckon.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The griffin soon alighted,</span>
					<span>and in his claws he held</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The little child, gripped tightly,</span>
					<span>while with fear it quailed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His ghastly mood and anger</span>
					<span>the bird was harshly showing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This must knights and kinsmen</span>
					<span>long bewail, with sorrow ever growing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The boy was sorely frightened,</span>
					<span>and began aloud to shriek;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Higher the mighty griffin</span>
					<span>flew, with outstretched beak;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the clouds above them floating</span>
					<span>he his prey was bearing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sigeband, lord of Ireland,</span>
					<span>loudly wept, his outcries never sparing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His friends and all his kinsmen</span>
					<span>the sorry tale soon heard;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They, in the death of his offspring,</span>
					<span>his bitter sorrow shared.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Downcast were he and his lady,</span>
					<span>and all their loss felt nearly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sorely they wept together,</span>
					<span>mourning the boy, now torn from them so early.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In this their mood so gloomy,</span>
					<span>the happy, merry plays</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must now be sadly ended.</span>
					<span>Before their frightened gaze,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The griffin so had robbed them</span>
					<span>that all for home now started,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sober, and filled with sadness.</span>
					<span>They truly felt forlorn, and heavy-hearted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king was bitterly weeping,</span>
					<span>his breast with tears was wet;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The high-born queen besought him</span>
					<span>his sorrows to forget,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus wisely to him speaking:</span>
					<span>“Should all in death be stricken,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There must be an end of all things;</span>
					<span>it is the will of God their lives hath taken.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now all would hence be faring,</span>
					<span>but the queen to them did say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“I beg you, knights and warriors,</span>
					<span>longer with us to stay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Our gifts of gold and silver,</span>
					<span>that here for you are ready,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You should not think of meanly;</span>
					<span>our love for you is ever true and steady.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The knights to her bowed lowly,</span>
					<span>and then began they all</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To say how they were thankful.</span>
					<span>The king, thereon, did call</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For silken stuffs, the richest,</span>
					<span>for all who there yet tarried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They had ne’er been cut nor opened;</span>
					<span>and from far-off lands had erst to the king been carried.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He gave them also horses,</span>
					<span>both palfreys and war-steeds;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The horses out of Ireland</span>
					<span>were tall and of hardy breeds.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Red gold was likewise given,</span>
					<span>and silver without weighing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king with care had bidden</span>
					<span>outfit good for his guests, no longer staying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon as the queen was willing,</span>
					<span>each her leave now takes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both lovely maids and women;</span>
					<span>each one herself bedecks</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With gifts that made her fairer;</span>
					<span>all new clothes are wearing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The high times now are ended;</span>
					<span>Sigeband’s land they leave, and are homeward faring.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
