<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XIX: How the Hegelings Went Home to Their Own Land</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-19" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How the Hegelings Went Home to Their Own Land</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Hegelings return, and announce to Queen Hilda the death of her husband and their ill-success. They decide to wait till the young knights become old enough for war, and then to make a second campaign against the Normans.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The kinsmen of King Hettel</span>
					<span>upon the sands had left</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many in death’s fast keeping;</span>
					<span>never knights bereft</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their homeward way had taken,</span>
					<span>hearts so sorry bringing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thereafter lovely women</span>
					<span>for this, with weeping eyes, their hands were wringing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin, the knight of Ortland,</span>
					<span>who to the fight had come,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>After such shame and losses,</span>
					<span>back to fair Hilda’s home</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Feared to bring these tidings,</span>
					<span>his mother dear to sadden.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She there was waiting daily,</span>
					<span>hoping her men would bring Gu-drun the maiden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te, fearing sorely,</span>
					<span>rode to Hilda’s land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The others dared not tell her</span>
					<span>of the loss on the Wulpensand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ill in the storm of fighting,</span>
					<span>his strength her men had warded;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not lightly her forgiveness</span>
					<span>he hoped to gain, who thus her lord had guarded.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When the word was spoken</span>
					<span>that Wâ-te near had come,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At once were men faint-hearted.</span>
					<span>Erewhiles when he came home,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Back from the war-field riding,</span>
					<span>it was with war-horns braying.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This he did at all times;</span>
					<span>but now they all were still, and nought were saying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Woe’s me!” said Lady Hilda,</span>
					<span>“what sorrows must we fear?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men of the aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>shattered shields now bear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Slowly step the horses,</span>
					<span>with armor heavy-loaded.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Some evil has befallen.</span>
					<span>Oh! say what harm to the king is now forboded?”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When thus the queen had spoken,</span>
					<span>but little time had passed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere to the aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>crowds came up in haste,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who of friends and kinsfolk</span>
					<span>tidings now were seeking.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon a tale he told them</span>
					<span>with which the hearts of all were well-nigh breaking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus spake the Sturmisch Wâ-te:</span>
					<span>“Your loss I may not hide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor falsehood will I tell you;</span>
					<span>all in the fight have died.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The young and old together</span>
					<span>at this with fear were stricken.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne’er was a throng more wretched;</span>
					<span>no other woes could one to theirs e’er liken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Alas! my bitter sorrow!”</span>
					<span>said King Hettel’s wife.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“From me my lord is sundered,</span>
					<span>who there laid down his life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The great and mighty Hettel!</span>
					<span>My pride, how is it fallen!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lost are child and husband!</span>
					<span>Gu-drun I ne’er shall see, from me forever stolen.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then both knights and maidens</span>
					<span>with sharpest woe were torn;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their sorrow knew no healing.</span>
					<span>Loudly the queen forlorn</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was heard, throughout the palace,</span>
					<span>for her husband mourning.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Ah, wretched me,” cried Hilda,</span>
					<span>“that now to Hartmut’s side the luck is turning!”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the brave old Wâ-te:</span>
					<span>“My lady, end your moan:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Home are they coming never,</span>
					<span>but when to men are grown</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The youths within our kingdom,</span>
					<span>sad days will have an ending;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Ludwig and to Hartmut</span>
					<span>the like we’ll do, our wrath upon them spending.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then quoth the weeping lady:</span>
					<span>“Alas, that I must live!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever I am owning</span>
					<span>I would most gladly give</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Could e’er my wrongs be righted.</span>
					<span>If but this were granted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I, poor God-forsaken,</span>
					<span>might see Gu-drun again, naught else were wanted.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Old Wâ-te spake to Hilda:</span>
					<span>“Lady, weep no more.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>’Tis best that we be sending,</span>
					<span>before twelve days are o’er,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To gather all your warriors,</span>
					<span>who will help you gladly</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To plan a raid on the foeman;</span>
					<span>so with the Norman will it yet go badly.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He said: “My Lady Hilda,</span>
					<span>list to what befell:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erewhile I took from pilgrims</span>
					<span>nine ships, and then set sail:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These should again be given</span>
					<span>to those we ill have treated;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That when new strifes we’re waging,</span>
					<span>a better luck to us may then be meted.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The weeping Hilda answered:</span>
					<span>“’Tis best that this be done;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ever is it fitting</span>
					<span>that men for misdeeds atone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To steal the goods of pilgrims</span>
					<span>is a sin not lightly shriven:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For every mark we’ve taken,</span>
					<span>to them three marks of silver shall be given.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The ships were brought to the pilgrims,</span>
					<span>as the queen did say;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not one there was among them,</span>
					<span>when they sailed away,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who left a curse behind him.</span>
					<span>For wrongs they found a healing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And for Hilda, Hagen’s daughter,</span>
					<span>they harbored, when they left, no bitter feeling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the morrow early,</span>
					<span>thither to come was seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic, the lord of Sealand;</span>
					<span>soon he found the queen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Weeping for her husband,</span>
					<span>who in death was lying.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She gave the knight a welcome,</span>
					<span>with hands she ever wrung, and deeply sighing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing the lady weeping,</span>
					<span>then, too, to weep began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The young and lordly Herwic;</span>
					<span>soon spake that well-born man:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Their lives not all have given,</span>
					<span>who help to you are owing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And who would gladly grant it;</span>
					<span>though many by their death their love were showing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“My arm shall never falter,</span>
					<span>nor heart from care be free,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till Hartmut feels my anger,</span>
					<span>who stole the maid from me,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And dared from home to tear her,</span>
					<span>death to many dealing:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon will I ride to his borders;</span>
					<span>then will I seize and hold his lands and dwelling.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His men, though filled with sorrow,</span>
					<span>rode towards the town,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Flocking to Matelan castle.</span>
					<span>The queen her hope made known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, whatsoe’er might happen,</span>
					<span>their fealty would not weaken;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, though the worst befell them,</span>
					<span>that she by them would never be forsaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To her the men from Friesland</span>
					<span>and those from Sturmland went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And from the Danish kingdom</span>
					<span>were warriors likewise sent;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The knights of Morunc also,</span>
					<span>from the land of Waleis riding,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thither came with the Hegelings,</span>
					<span>to where the fair Queen Hilda was abiding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Forthwith there came from Ortland,</span>
					<span>Ortwin, Hilda’s son;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then mourned they, as was fitting,</span>
					<span>his father dead and gone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon were all the warriors</span>
					<span>aside with their ladies speaking,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And talking of the inroad</span>
					<span>the fighters strong one day would thence be making.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the aged Wâ-te:</span>
					<span>“This can never be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till those who now are children</span>
					<span>fully-grown we see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And worthy to be swordsmen.</span>
					<span>Then, their fathers mourning,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And of their kinsmen mindful,</span>
					<span>gladly will they with us to war be turning.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Queen Hilda then made answer:</span>
					<span>“To wait for this were long;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile Gu-drun, my daughter,</span>
					<span>held by foemen strong,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must in a far-off kingdom</span>
					<span>be kept in bondage bitter;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I, poor queen and mother,</span>
					<span>shall know no bliss, and my heart will ne’er grow lighter.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the Danish Fru-te:</span>
					<span>“The maid we cannot free</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until once more your kingdom</span>
					<span>shall full of warriors be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, for the struggle ready,</span>
					<span>we hence shall ride, unfearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so upon our foemen</span>
					<span>shall work the greatest ill with blows unsparing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To this Queen Hilda answered:</span>
					<span>“That day may God soon give;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But I, unhappy woman,</span>
					<span>a weary life must live.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whoe’er of me is mindful,</span>
					<span>and of Gu-drun, poor maiden,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Him will I trust most fully,</span>
					<span>knowing his heart for us with care is laden.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They now their leave were taking;</span>
					<span>to them the lady spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“May he be blest and happy</span>
					<span>who thought for me shall take.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>’Tis right that you, brave warriors,</span>
					<span>to fight for me are ready;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile for the coming inroad</span>
					<span>do all you can, and therein be you speedy.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wisely then spake Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>the warrior old and good:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Lady, we should be felling</span>
					<span>trees in the western wood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since we to fight have chosen,</span>
					<span>our hopes upon it staking,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men of every princedom</span>
					<span>should forty well-built ships for us be making.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“I too will bid,” quoth Hilda,</span>
					<span>“that near the deep sea-flood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Twenty ships be builded,</span>
					<span>strong, and firm, and good;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And have them fully ready</span>
					<span>—my hest shall well be heeded—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bear my friends and kindred</span>
					<span>to where they for the fight will soon be needed.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried, lord of Moorland,</span>
					<span>while their leave they took,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With kind and seemly bearing,</span>
					<span>thus to the women spoke:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“You have to tell me only</span>
					<span>when our time to wait is ending;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To sail shall I be ready,</span>
					<span>nor need you then for me be further sending.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the sorrowing women,</span>
					<span>before they spread the sail,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The friendly guests, now leaving,</span>
					<span>bade a kind farewell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hearts of knights and maidens</span>
					<span>deep in woe were sinking;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet warlike deeds they plotted</span>
					<span>of which their Norman foes were never thinking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they at length had ridden</span>
					<span>back again to their land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sadly they mourned their losses:</span>
					<span>then to the Wulpensand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For the sake of the dead, did Hilda</span>
					<span>bid that food be taken</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the priests for them there praying.</span>
					<span>The queen was wise, the dead were not forsaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There she bade to be builded</span>
					<span>a minster fair and wide;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A house for the sick, and a cloister</span>
					<span>built they at its side,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Near where the slain were buried.</span>
					<span>In many a land one heareth</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Its name, and of those there fallen:</span>
					<span>‘The church of Wulpensand’ is the name it beareth.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
