<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XIII: How Siegfried Made War Against Herwic</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Siegfried Made War Against Herwic</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Siegfried, a rival suitor for Gudrun, invades the land of Herwic, who sends to Hettel for his assistance: Hettel with many of his vassals comes to his help. Siegfried is driven into a castle, and there besieged.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried, king of Moorland,</span>
					<span>called for all his men;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ships were soon made ready,</span>
					<span>wherever they were seen;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then with food and weapons</span>
					<span>to load them it was bidden,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For war against King Herwic:</span>
					<span>from all but faithful friends his thoughts were hidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A score of wide, strong barges</span>
					<span>bade he to be made.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween they liked it little</span>
					<span>to whom the king now said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That forthwith unto Sealand</span>
					<span>to fight must they be faring;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he would thither hasten</span>
					<span>as soon as, winter o’er, springtide was nearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Eighty thousand warriors</span>
					<span>soon to him had come;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of fighting men in Alzabie</span>
					<span>none were left at home.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then swore the Moorland princes</span>
					<span>for war to make them ready;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Some of these still lingered,</span>
					<span>others to follow with the king were speedy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then against the Sealands</span>
					<span>the threat of war he made.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This roused the wrath of Herwic,</span>
					<span>who well might him upbraid;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To earn the hate of Siegfried</span>
					<span>wrong had he done him never.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His marches and his castles</span>
					<span>he bade his men to guard, now more than ever.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then he said in sorrow</span>
					<span>to friends who came in haste</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That foes would burn his castles,</span>
					<span>and his lands lay waste:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All he could give his liegemen,</span>
					<span>that he held but lightly.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They took their wages gladly;</span>
					<span>that war would bring them riches, hoped they rightly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>About the gladsome May-time,</span>
					<span>there went across the sea</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Warriors out of Alzabie,</span>
					<span>and eke from Abakie.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Onward came they proudly,</span>
					<span>as though the world’s end seeking;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many now trod boldly</span>
					<span>who in the dust their rest would soon be taking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Into the land of Herwic</span>
					<span>they cast the burning brand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then all whom he could gather,</span>
					<span>and all his friends at hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rode to the field with Herwic.</span>
					<span>Thro’ war-storms grimly driven,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They with their lives must bargain</span>
					<span>for gold and gems and silver to them given.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To him, the king of Sealand,</span>
					<span>great ill erelong was wrought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A stalwart foeman was he:</span>
					<span>Aha, how well he fought!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He made the land the richer</span>
					<span>with the dead there lying:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The old in fight grew youthful:</span>
					<span>the strong were slain, who recked not yet of dying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Long the fighting lasted,</span>
					<span>till thickly lay the dead:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the brave King Herwic</span>
					<span>came at last the need</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To flee into his marches,</span>
					<span>for life he there was turning;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All his lands lay smoking:</span>
					<span>of this to Gudrun, his lady, sent he warning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now to the land of Hettel</span>
					<span>men at his bidding went:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many tears and bitter</span>
					<span>they shed when they were sent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To find the great King Hettel,</span>
					<span>and the tale to him to carry.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They were not long in showing</span>
					<span>unto the king their plight so hard and dreary.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Though sad in mood he found them,</span>
					<span>a welcome kind he gave,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such as far-off wanderers</span>
					<span>and homeless friends should have.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He asked if from their homesteads</span>
					<span>they were hither driven,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When foes their lands had wasted,</span>
					<span>and all their marches had to flames been given.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to him they answered:</span>
					<span>“In sorrow did we leave:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The faithful men of Herwic,</span>
					<span>from early morn till eve,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sell their lives full dearly,</span>
					<span>and well his gifts are earning;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They fight for name and honor:</span>
					<span>for this at home are many women mourning.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to them said Hettel:</span>
					<span>“To my daughter make it known;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever she shall wish for</span>
					<span>at once shall that be done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If she for vengeance calleth</span>
					<span>for the wrongs he wrought you,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We then will help you gladly,</span>
					<span>and pay him back the ill that he has brought you.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before they yet had spoken</span>
					<span>unto the fair young maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Already of her sorrow</span>
					<span>her friends had taken heed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lady had been longing</span>
					<span>to see the heralds hourly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Them in haste she sent for,</span>
					<span>the loss of land and honor, mourning sorely.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they came before her,</span>
					<span>they found the queenly maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sitting sad, and weeping⁠—</span>
					<span>faithful love she had;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She asked them of her lover,</span>
					<span>and how they leave had taken,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And if he still was living</span>
					<span>when they of late had land and home forsaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then answered one among them:</span>
					<span>“We left him sound and well;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But since the day we saw him</span>
					<span>we know not what befell,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or how the men of Moorland</span>
					<span>may his home have wasted:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Mischief they had done him,</span>
					<span>neither from fire and plunder had they rested.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Listen, high-born maiden!</span>
					<span>my master’s bidding heed:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He and all his warriors</span>
					<span>are now in sorest need.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To lose both life and honor</span>
					<span>they are fearing daily;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now my lord, King Herwic,</span>
					<span>sends to beg your men to his help to rally.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gudrun, the lovely maiden,</span>
					<span>then from her seat upstood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The wrongs that had been done her</span>
					<span>she to her father showed:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She said her men were slaughtered,</span>
					<span>and her castles wasted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And told her father, Hettel,</span>
					<span>that to ride to Herwic’s help she would he had hasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then in her arms she pressed him,</span>
					<span>her eyes with weeping wet:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Help, O dearest father!</span>
					<span>My woes are all too great,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unless your many liegemen,</span>
					<span>with ready hand, are willing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To help my good friend Herwic:</span>
					<span>none else can end the strife, my sorrow healing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“That will I leave to no one,”</span>
					<span>the king did freely say;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“I will haste to help King Herwic,</span>
					<span>and wait not many a day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As well as I am able,</span>
					<span>I will end your sorrow:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I will call for the aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>and many other friends, before the morrow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“He will bring from Sturmland</span>
					<span>all the men of his lands;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And when ’tis known by Morunc</span>
					<span>how ill with us it stands,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fighters full a thousand</span>
					<span>to bring will he be speedy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Our foes shall find out quickly,</span>
					<span>that under helmets we to march are ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Horant, too, from Denmark</span>
					<span>shall bring upon the way</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of men full thrice a thousand:</span>
					<span>nor will Irold stay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But he will raise his banner,</span>
					<span>and hasten to the slaughter.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, too, thy brother Ortwin</span>
					<span>will come, and all will earn the blessing of my daughter.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The heralds soon went riding</span>
					<span>whom the maid did send.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her friends far off were living,</span>
					<span>but all who help would lend</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To heal the maiden’s sorrow</span>
					<span>would honor great be earning;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Knights would she warmly welcome:</span>
					<span>for this erelong the more to her were turning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hilda, the maiden’s mother,</span>
					<span>unto her daughter spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Whoe’er is quick to help you,</span>
					<span>and now his shield shall take</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To follow with your warriors</span>
					<span>when they to war are faring,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate’er we gain by fighting</span>
					<span>he shall, in truth, henceforth with us be sharing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the chests were opened;</span>
					<span>men to court soon bore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate’er therein was lying,</span>
					<span>of fighting-gear a store,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fast with steel well studded;</span>
					<span>then the knights were laden</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With armor white as silver:</span>
					<span>this made glad the heart of the queenly maiden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To full a thousand warriors</span>
					<span>were given clothes and steeds;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Out of stalls men brought them,</span>
					<span>as oft the horse one leads,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When, along the highways,</span>
					<span>men to the fight go riding.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all the king’s good horses</span>
					<span>they left but very few at rest abiding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When from his queenly lady</span>
					<span>the king his leave did take,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both Hilda and her daughter</span>
					<span>began to weep for his sake;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But on the knights forth riding</span>
					<span>gladly they were gazing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And said: “May God in heaven</span>
					<span>so help the fight that men may you be praising.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>After they all were gathered</span>
					<span>without the castle gate,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Youths were there heard singing,</span>
					<span>hoping for plunder great.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Each thought, by hardest fighting,</span>
					<span>to win himself much riches;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But far must they yet be riding,</span>
					<span>for long the way to their master’s foemen stretches.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On the third morning early</span>
					<span>came, at break of day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The very aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>with a thousand to the fray;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And from the Danish kingdom,</span>
					<span>as the seventh day was dawning,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Came Horant with four thousand,</span>
					<span>to whom the fair Gudrun had sent her warning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From out the Waalisch marches</span>
					<span>Morunc thither rode;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He ever fought for the ladies,</span>
					<span>for the love to them he owed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Twenty thousand warriors</span>
					<span>he brought⁠—for nought he tarried:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These were all well-weaponed,</span>
					<span>and happily rode, while help to the king they carried.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The queenly maiden’s brother,</span>
					<span>Ortwin, the youthful knight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brought across the water,</span>
					<span>to help her in the fight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Forty hundred warriors,</span>
					<span>or even a number greater:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were it known to the men of Alzabie,</span>
					<span>well might they have feared to meet him later.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before they yet could help him,</span>
					<span>to Herwic and his men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The strife had now gone badly,</span>
					<span>his luck began to wane:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him and all his followers</span>
					<span>was evil sore betiding;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Altho’ they struggled bravely,</span>
					<span>his foes too near his castle gate were riding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Great mishaps to Herwic</span>
					<span>from Siegfried’s kin arose;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For now the gates of the castle</span>
					<span>were shattered by their blows.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>False friends had made it easy,</span>
					<span>and boasts too loudly spoken:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If e’er to such one trusteth,</span>
					<span>it worketh him no good, and his hopes are broken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now ’twas told to Herwic,</span>
					<span>men fast for help had gone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The foes from fight ne’er rested,</span>
					<span>by anger driven on;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From early morn to even,</span>
					<span>they oft to the strife were bidden:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But now the friends of Herwic</span>
					<span>on every side drew near, nor long lay hidden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When this the men of Karadie</span>
					<span>did learn, they well might fear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That now two kings against them</span>
					<span>in the fight should share:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For them it was unlucky</span>
					<span>that Hettel now was leading</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His many fighters thither;</span>
					<span>he from afar had come, to Herwic speeding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Friends were they to each other;</span>
					<span>so both would meet the foe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These, the men from Moorland,</span>
					<span>bold themselves did show:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw by all their bearing</span>
					<span>they would from none be flying;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those who with them struggled</span>
					<span>by hardest toil must their reward be buying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te, the very daring,</span>
					<span>with all his knights had come;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gudrun, the lovely lady,</span>
					<span>had called him from his home</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To help her lover, Herwic,</span>
					<span>and a host had ridden hither:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate’er might now befall them,</span>
					<span>later full happy rode they thence together.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Although their foes were heathen,</span>
					<span>from out the Moorish land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They might not back be driven:</span>
					<span>one well might understand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That in any earthly kingdom</span>
					<span>they were the best and boldest.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To all who came to meet them</span>
					<span>they gave a sorry welcome and a shelter coldest.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic, king of Sealand,</span>
					<span>his loss would now make good</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon his foes from Alzabie.</span>
					<span>For this must flow the blood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On either side of many;</span>
					<span>to friends and kin were given</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wounds full fast and heavy:</span>
					<span>to bear his own was hard for Hettel even.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they had come together</span>
					<span>of whom I spoke before,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bringing all their followers,</span>
					<span>gladness they knew no more;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On them were ever resting</span>
					<span>heavy care and sorrow</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For what the night might bring them.</span>
					<span>They thought: “How shall we live to see the morrow?”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thrice with the Moorish foemen</span>
					<span>they strove on the stormy field,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While peace was given the castle,</span>
					<span>as knights are wont to yield.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Again with sword and spear-shaft</span>
					<span>they the strife would settle:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Peace not yet they wished for,</span>
					<span>but wounds the more they got in hard-fought battle.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Nor Herwic’s men nor Siegfried’s</span>
					<span>yet would leave the fight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They to the last had struggled,</span>
					<span>and many a bravest knight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the field lay wounded,</span>
					<span>or in death was sleeping.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This was told to the women,</span>
					<span>who now began a wild, unmeasured weeping.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>How well the daring Wâ-te</span>
					<span>in battle-storm did fight!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Strong was he and skilful,</span>
					<span>and oft the aged knight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gave to the foe heart-sorrow,</span>
					<span>by all the ill he wrought him:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ever to fight with his warriors,</span>
					<span>by the side of the boldest and best, his wishes taught him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Horant, too, from Denmark,</span>
					<span>brave was he enough!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beneath his hand were shattered</span>
					<span>helmets strong and tough;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne’er by him ’twas forgotten</span>
					<span>to wear his armor shining;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ill he wrought to many,</span>
					<span>and oft the ranks of his foemen he was thinning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The quick and fearless Morunc</span>
					<span>boldly stretched his hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ofttimes beyond his buckler,</span>
					<span>and oft the fight he gained.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To shun the king of Moorland</span>
					<span>ne’er would he be seeking;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon that king, so mighty,</span>
					<span>he the wrath of Herwic now was wreaking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The great and doughty Hettel,</span>
					<span>when that his daughter fair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had sent to beg her father</span>
					<span>in Herwic’s fight to share,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That peace at last might follow,</span>
					<span>fought for him not idly:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If life were dear to any,</span>
					<span>’twere best to shun King Hettel’s borders widely.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Bravely strove King Herwic</span>
					<span>on the field and at the gate;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>None than he fought better.</span>
					<span>His head was often wet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beneath his armor dripping,</span>
					<span>with sweat that fast was oozing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In death were many deafened;</span>
					<span>they who would crush him must their lives be losing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wigaleis, the faithful,</span>
					<span>great ill to many wrought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Fru-te, too, from Daneland,</span>
					<span>with knightly prowess fought:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The thanks of all his fellows</span>
					<span>he should of right be sharing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He strove where the fight was stormy,</span>
					<span>and none e’er knew an aged knight so daring.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The lord who came from Ortland,</span>
					<span>Ortwin, brave and young,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Showed the hand of a warrior;</span>
					<span>it was on many a tongue,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That never man in warfare</span>
					<span>bore himself more boldly:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wounds he gave the deepest,</span>
					<span>and this by none was ever told of coldly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For twelve long days of fighting,</span>
					<span>earnestly they strove.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men led on by Hettel</span>
					<span>oft their spear-shafts drove</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thro’ their foes’ light bucklers,</span>
					<span>as close they met together:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fighters proud from Moorland</span>
					<span>sorely rued the day that brought them thither.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the thirteenth morning,</span>
					<span>ere early mass was said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With sorry heart spake Siegfried:</span>
					<span>“How many here lie dead</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all our bravest warriors!</span>
					<span>In his lofty wooing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king of Sealand also</span>
					<span>here to himself has evil great been doing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the men of Karadie</span>
					<span>made he known his will,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To a stronghold to betake them,</span>
					<span>there their wounds to heal:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They, with those from Alzabie,</span>
					<span>were earnest to go thither;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right glad were these far-riders</span>
					<span>that all in death might not be found together.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to a sheltering castle</span>
					<span>to turn they all began,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where onward, fast beside it,</span>
					<span>a wide, deep river ran.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While they were thither riding,</span>
					<span>fleeing away from danger,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They were still seen fighting</span>
					<span>with those who ne’er would yield their homes to a stranger.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now against King Hettel</span>
					<span>the king of Moorland rode:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Well might one believe it,</span>
					<span>his former warlike mood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was but a slight beginning;</span>
					<span>he soon a foe was meeting</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who many of his kinsmen</span>
					<span>with deep and deadly wounds of late was greeting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel, he of the Hegelings,</span>
					<span>and Siegfried, the Moorland king,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There unto the struggle</span>
					<span>all their strength did bring;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shields were hacked to pieces</span>
					<span>by the swords they wielded:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The mighty lord of Moorland</span>
					<span>to the castle fled, nor to him of Daneland yielded.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Camps by the men from Denmark</span>
					<span>for themselves were made:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then the beleaguered warriors⁠—</span>
					<span>it cannot be gainsaid⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E’er many days were over,</span>
					<span>with care were burdened sadly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>However good their shelter,</span>
					<span>all would then have been at home more gladly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus the boastful fighters</span>
					<span>were by the foeman’s hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fast held within the stronghold;</span>
					<span>nor was their knightly band</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now able to give battle,</span>
					<span>although for this yet longing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their castle well they guarded,</span>
					<span>as best they might, wherein they now were thronging.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
