<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale IX: How Gudrun Was Sought by Siegfried</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Gudrun Was Sought by Siegfried</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Wâ-te, Horant, and the other vassals of Hettel go back to their homes. Hilda bears to Hettel a son, Ortwin, and a daughter, Gudrun, who is afterwards sought by Siegfried, king of Moorland. He is rejected by her father, Hettel, and retires in anger.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>We speak no more of Hagen.</span>
					<span>A word may now be told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>About King Hettel’s kinsmen:</span>
					<span>they who land did hold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ever owed him fealty</span>
					<span>for these and for their castles;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To court they all came often</span>
					<span>when Hettel and Hilda sent to call their vassals.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te went to Sturmland,</span>
					<span>Morunc to Nifland rode;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Horant, prince of Denmark,</span>
					<span>led his warriors good</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Givers, by the seashore,</span>
					<span>where as lord they held him;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There their homes they guarded,</span>
					<span>and many, far and wide, their master called him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With mighty sway in Ortland</span>
					<span>Irold had his seat;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Its lands he held of Hettel;</span>
					<span>so, as a vassal meet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Near and far to serve him,</span>
					<span>his duty was the greater:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king was brave and worthy;</span>
					<span>and ne’er for a lord of lands was known a better.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>If ever in any kingdom</span>
					<span>Hettel heard them speak</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of a fair and well-born maiden,</span>
					<span>her he sought to take</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Into his home and castle,</span>
					<span>as handmaid to his lady:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever Hilda wished for,</span>
					<span>to help wild Hagen’s child they all were ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king, with his wife beside him,</span>
					<span>was happy on the throne;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their life was ever blissful.</span>
					<span>To all in the land ’twas known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That better far and dearer</span>
					<span>than all on earth he thought her.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Never by all his kinsmen</span>
					<span>a lovelier could be found, where’er they sought her.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Within seven years thereafter</span>
					<span>Hettel, in stormy fight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thrice to his foes gave battle.</span>
					<span>They who, day and night,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wrong his name and honor</span>
					<span>did their utmost gladly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now by the knightly Hettel</span>
					<span>found themselves brought low and chastened sadly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His castles he did strengthen,</span>
					<span>and peace he gave to his land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As well a king befitteth:</span>
					<span>such were the deeds of his hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That never in any kingdom,</span>
					<span>when his name was spoken,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was it said he was faint-hearted.</span>
					<span>The praise of all did well his worth betoken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>While, with name so worthy,</span>
					<span>Hettel held the throne,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te, the man of wisdom,</span>
					<span>never left undone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His duty to his master,</span>
					<span>to see him three times yearly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Truly he was faithful,</span>
					<span>far and near, to the lord he held so dearly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Horant, the lord from Denmark,</span>
					<span>to court not seldom rode;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Costly gems and clothing</span>
					<span>on the maids he there bestowed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With gold and silken raiment,</span>
					<span>meet for women’s wearing:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He from Daneland brought them,</span>
					<span>and to all who wished was he of gifts unsparing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The service true and steady</span>
					<span>that the liegemen of the king</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gave to the lordly Hettel</span>
					<span>honor to him did bring.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Praised was he for knighthood</span>
					<span>more than any other:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This Hilda also furthered,</span>
					<span>a queen herself, and child of a queenly mother.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hilda, Hagen’s daughter,</span>
					<span>children two did bear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto her lord, King Hettel:</span>
					<span>to bring them up with care</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His faithful friends were bidden.</span>
					<span>Soon among his vassals</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were the tidings bruited</span>
					<span>that an heir no more was lacking for his lands and castles.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One became a warrior,</span>
					<span>Ortwin was his name;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Wâ-te he was trusted.</span>
					<span>It was the teacher’s aim</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he from early boyhood</span>
					<span>should his thoughts be turning</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To all things good and worthy;</span>
					<span>to be a trusty knight he thus was learning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The very comely daughter</span>
					<span>of Hilda and the king</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was called Gudrun the lovely:</span>
					<span>from the land of the Hegeling</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Denmark she was carried,</span>
					<span>to be in her kinsmen’s wardship.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus they helped King Hettel,</span>
					<span>and this they never felt to be a hardship.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When the maid grew older,</span>
					<span>her shape became so fair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That neither man nor woman</span>
					<span>to praise her could forbear:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Far from the maiden’s birthplace,</span>
					<span>all her worth were telling.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gudrun her kinsfolk called her,</span>
					<span>in the Danish land where now she had her dwelling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>That age she now was reaching</span>
					<span>when, had she been a man,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A sword she might have wielded.</span>
					<span>Many a prince was fain</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wed the lovely maiden,</span>
					<span>and sought her love and favor;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But many came a-wooing</span>
					<span>who soon their hopes must lose, and win her never.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>However fair was Hilda,</span>
					<span>Hettel’s lovely wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet was Gudrun more lovely,</span>
					<span>and fair beyond belief;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>More fair than the early Hilda,</span>
					<span>erst to Ireland carried.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Above all other women</span>
					<span>Gudrun was praised, ere yet the maid was married.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Her father scorned to give her</span>
					<span>to the king of Alzabé;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he heard he could not win her</span>
					<span>to him ’twas a sorry day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He held himself most highly</span>
					<span>for all his kingly graces,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thought there could be no one</span>
					<span>whose deeds, like his, were worthy of men’s praises.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Both brave he was and daring,</span>
					<span>and from the Moorland came:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He was known afar and widely,</span>
					<span>Siegfried was his name;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A king was he full mighty</span>
					<span>over vassals seven.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He sued for Hilda’s daughter,</span>
					<span>such tales of her lofty worth to him were given.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He, with his faithful liegemen</span>
					<span>from far Icaria’s strand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Won many costly prizes</span>
					<span>there in Hettel’s land:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His strong and doughty warriors,</span>
					<span>in sight of ladies seated</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before King Hettel’s castle,</span>
					<span>in games of knighthood often there were mated.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When Hilda and her daughter</span>
					<span>passed the hall within,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the house of Wigaleis</span>
					<span>there rose a mighty din</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From warriors of the Moorland,</span>
					<span>who, all boldly dashing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rode in the sight of the women;</span>
					<span>oft of spears and shields was heard the clashing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Never could knight in tilting</span>
					<span>better in this behave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A friendly will she bore him,</span>
					<span>and oft kind words she gave,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though he was brown to look on,</span>
					<span>and in hue was dusky even.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He for her love was yearning,</span>
					<span>yet for a wife she ne’er to him was given.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This pained him beyond measure,</span>
					<span>and truly he was wroth</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he from far had ridden,</span>
					<span>yet gave she not her troth.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To burn the land of Hettel</span>
					<span>then did he threaten madly:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His followers from Moorland,</span>
					<span>when now his hopes were lost, were mourning sadly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From him was the maid withholden</span>
					<span>by Hettel’s lofty pride;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now their loving friendship</span>
					<span>was ended on either side.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then swore the Moor that never</span>
					<span>he his hate would slacken,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And that the grudge he bore him,</span>
					<span>whate’er befell, should never be forsaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then from the land of the Hegeling</span>
					<span>rode they all away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When many years were ended,</span>
					<span>there came at last a day</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When by a knight most worthy</span>
					<span>was bitter sorrow tasted;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then the foes of Herwic</span>
					<span>did him the worst they could, nor in it rested.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
