<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XI: How Herwic Sent to Seek Gudrun and How Hartmut Came Himself</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Herwic Sent to Seek Gudrun and How Hartmut Came Himself</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Herwic, king of Sealand, sends suitors for the hand of Gu-drun, who are also rejected. Hartmut of Normandy comes to woo her in person, and is kindly received by her; she, however, begs him, if he values his life, to leave the court. He returns to Normandy, resolved to win her by force.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut left his wooing</span>
					<span>to wait for many a year.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon a tale was bruited</span>
					<span>(’twas true what men did hear)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of one whose name was Herwic,</span>
					<span>a king as yet but youthful;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Often his worth was spoken,</span>
					<span>and men yet speak of him with praises truthful.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He began his wooing,</span>
					<span>trusting the lovely maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Would take him for her lover;</span>
					<span>long his hopes he fed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And much he toiled to win her,</span>
					<span>both with love and riches:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But though the maid was willing,</span>
					<span>her father, Hettel, he in vain beseeches.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Though Herwic long was striving,</span>
					<span>and men to seek her rode,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet was his wooing slighted;</span>
					<span>for this his wrath he showed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The heart of proud young Herwic</span>
					<span>by heavy care was fettered;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Freely his love he gave her,</span>
					<span>and thought a life with her could not be bettered.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There came at length a morning</span>
					<span>when it to them befell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That in the Hegeling kingdom</span>
					<span>both knights and maids as well,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With many lovely ladies,</span>
					<span>his coming never fearing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before them saw bold Hartmut;</span>
					<span>Hettel could not believe he’d be so daring.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From this did endless evil</span>
					<span>soon come upon the land:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These guests high-born and worthy</span>
					<span>were yet an unknown band;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut and his kinsmen</span>
					<span>their host’s goodwill were sharing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he the hope still harbored</span>
					<span>that the maid would yet the crown with him be wearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now before Queen Hilda</span>
					<span>by ladies he was seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To stand with lofty breeding,</span>
					<span>and with a stately mien.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There the proud young Hartmut</span>
					<span>wore a look so knightly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he the love of ladies</span>
					<span>well might ask, and ’twould be granted rightly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Well-grown was he in body,</span>
					<span>fair he was and bold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Kind as well as lordly.</span>
					<span>Why I ne’er was told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had Hettel and Queen Hilda</span>
					<span>from him withheld their daughter,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he had thought to woo her;</span>
					<span>wroth was he to be scorned when now he sought her.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of her his heart had longed for</span>
					<span>he now had gained the sight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There oft were stolen glances</span>
					<span>between Gu-drun and the knight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He made it known to the maiden,</span>
					<span>by speech from others hidden,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he was young King Hartmut,</span>
					<span>and from the Norman land had lately ridden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then she told her wooer</span>
					<span>the pain to her it gave;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And though she wished he ever</span>
					<span>a happy life might have,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet from her father’s kingdom</span>
					<span>she begged him now to hasten,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For in the land of Hettel</span>
					<span>was his life at risk, and this would never lessen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She looked on him so kindly</span>
					<span>that now her heart was warned</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he should stay no longer,</span>
					<span>for here his suit was spurned.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Friendly was she to Hartmut,</span>
					<span>who her love so wanted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But his hopes she little heeded,</span>
					<span>and while he wooed, not much to him she granted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>At last her well-bred lover</span>
					<span>from Hettel’s land must go;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He bore upon his shoulders</span>
					<span>a heavy load of woe:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wreak his wrath on Hettel</span>
					<span>would he now be choosing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet feared he, if he harmed him,</span>
					<span>that he the maiden’s love would then be losing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>’Twas thus the daring Hartmut</span>
					<span>the Hegeling kingdom left;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Much he felt of sadness,</span>
					<span>though not of hope bereft.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He knew not yet the ending</span>
					<span>of his wooing of the maiden;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For the sake of her, thereafter,</span>
					<span>were helmets cleft, and many sorrow-laden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When he had reached his kingdom,</span>
					<span>and home again did turn,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where dwelt his father and mother,</span>
					<span>Hartmut, grim and stern,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For war with Hettel longing,</span>
					<span>began to make him ready.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gerlind, the old she-devil,</span>
					<span>at all times spurred him on with hatred steady.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
