<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale XXVII: How Ludwig and Hartmut Met the Hegelings</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-27" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How Ludwig and Hartmut Met the Hegelings</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hartmut names to Ludwig the banners of the coming knights. On learning that the Hegeling army is approaching, Gerlind counsels her son, Hartmut, to await a siege; but he chooses to sally forth, with Ludwig and their followers, and a battle ensues, in which Ludwig overthrows Herwic.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Asleep still left he lying</span>
					<span>all his faithful men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He and his father Ludwig,</span>
					<span>the twain, to go were seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, gazing from the window,</span>
					<span>they saw the throngs below them.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Quickly then said Hartmut:</span>
					<span>“Too near our castle-walls methinks they show them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“I ween they are not pilgrims,</span>
					<span>in truth, my father dear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>More like it is that Wâ-te</span>
					<span>and all his men draw near.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He from Sturmland cometh,</span>
					<span>the lord of Ortland bringing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men I see are like them,</span>
					<span>as I know from the flag that they to the breeze are flinging.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“I see a brown silk pennon,</span>
					<span>that comes from Karadé;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before that flag is lowered,</span>
					<span>many will rue the day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On it a head is blazoned,—</span>
					<span>as red as gold it glitters:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Guests so bold and warlike</span>
					<span>we well can spare; their sight the day embitters.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“The Moorland king is bringing</span>
					<span>full twenty thousand men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Knights as strong and daring</span>
					<span>as any I have seen;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To win from us great honor</span>
					<span>methinks they now are craving.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There comes another banner,</span>
					<span>that o’er yet other knights its folds is waving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“It is the flag of Horant,</span>
					<span>the knight from the Danish land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I see with him Lord Fru-te,</span>
					<span>I know both him and his band.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And hither, too, from Waleis,</span>
					<span>many foemen leading,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Morunc now comes riding;</span>
					<span>he, for the morning’s fight, o’er the sands is speeding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“I see another banner,</span>
					<span>on it a chevron red,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With sharpened spears within it;</span>
					<span>for this shall many bleed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin it is who bears it,</span>
					<span>from Ortland hither faring:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erewhile we slew his father;</span>
					<span>no kindly thought to us he now is bearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“There floats another banner,</span>
					<span>whiter than any swan;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Blazons bright and golden</span>
					<span>you well may see thereon.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It is our mother Hilda</span>
					<span>who sends it o’er the water;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hatred of the Hegelings</span>
					<span>will soon be known by me who stole her daughter.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“There I see uplifted</span>
					<span>a flag outspreading wide;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of sky-blue silk ’tis woven.</span>
					<span>The truth I will not hide;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic bears this banner,</span>
					<span>he in the Sealands dwelling.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sea-leaves are shown upon it;</span>
					<span>he soon on us his wrath will here be telling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“There Irold, too, is coming,—</span>
					<span>this that I say is true,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From Friesland leading many,</span>
					<span>as well indeed I know,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With fighting men from Holstein,</span>
					<span>warriors brave and daring.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A stormy fight is nearing;</span>
					<span>now in our castle all must arms be wearing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then cried Hartmut loudly:</span>
					<span>“Up, my faithful men!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If to these guests so warlike,</span>
					<span>who ’neath our walls are seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It may not now be granted</span>
					<span>to ride so boldly near us,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, before the gateway,</span>
					<span>with sword-blows we must greet them, and bravely bear us.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then from their beds upsprang they</span>
					<span>all who yet did lie;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At once, to bring their war-gear,</span>
					<span>loudly did they cry.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The call to guard their master</span>
					<span>gladly they were hearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Forty hundred warriors</span>
					<span>showed themselves, their shining armor wearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig and Hartmut with him</span>
					<span>armed themselves for fight:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the sad and homeless maidens</span>
					<span>this was a sorry sight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These within the castle</span>
					<span>uneasy hearts were keeping;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They said to one another:</span>
					<span>“Let him who smiled before this day be weeping!”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Quickly came Queen Gerlind,</span>
					<span>old King Ludwig’s wife;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She said: “What will you, Hartmut?</span>
					<span>Would you lose your life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With that of all your kinsmen</span>
					<span>who here our lot are sharing?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The foe will surely slay you,</span>
					<span>if to leave the castle-walls you now be daring.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The well-born knight then answered:</span>
					<span>“Mother, stay within;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You may not give your teaching</span>
					<span>to me or to my men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Spare your words for women;</span>
					<span>they mayhap will listen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While they sit at sewing,</span>
					<span>making their silks with gold and gems to glisten.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Now, mother, let us see you</span>
					<span>send Gu-drun to wash,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As you did before, with her maidens,</span>
					<span>where the billows dash.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You weened they all were friendless,</span>
					<span>and had no kindred living;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You yet may see, ere nightfall,</span>
					<span>what thanks to us our guests will yet be giving.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake his devilish mother:</span>
					<span>“I did it for your sake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thinking her will to bridle.</span>
					<span>My bidding kindly take;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Strongly built is the castle,</span>
					<span>let now the gates be fastened;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They then will gain but little</span>
					<span>who on their toilsome way have hither hastened.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Full well you know it, Hartmut,</span>
					<span>you bear the maiden’s hate,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For you have slain her kinsmen:</span>
					<span>your watch you must not bate.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It is not friends or kinsfolk</span>
					<span>who at our gates are knocking;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The proud and warlike Hegelings,</span>
					<span>twenty to one of us, come hither flocking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Of this bethink you further,</span>
					<span>my well-belovéd son:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bread we have in the castle</span>
					<span>and wine for every one;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Food will not be lacking</span>
					<span>if here for a year we are staying;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But if on the field you are taken,</span>
					<span>our foes will you from bondage ne’er be freeing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to him spake further</span>
					<span>old King Ludwig’s wife:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Ever guard your honor,</span>
					<span>but do not lose your life.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bid men to shoot with longbows</span>
					<span>at the loop-holes standing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So shall wounds be given,</span>
					<span>for which their friends at home will tears be spending.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Let slings with ropes be fitted;</span>
					<span>we then will meet the foe</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By hurling rocks upon them:</span>
					<span>knights we have enow.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before with these new-comers</span>
					<span>you your swords are crossing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Stones will I and my maidens</span>
					<span>bring in aprons white, on them to be tossing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Angrily spake Hartmut:</span>
					<span>“Lady, get you gone!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Why do you seek to lead me?</span>
					<span>Is not my mind my own?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before my foes shall find me</span>
					<span>within my castle hiding,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Outside I would die far sooner,</span>
					<span>in fight with Hilda’s men, against me riding.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to him said, weeping,</span>
					<span>old King Ludwig’s wife:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“I gave to you this warning</span>
					<span>that you might spare your life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And guard yourself the better.</span>
					<span>Whoe’er is seen this morning</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beneath your banner fighting,</span>
					<span>rich gifts from us shall he be fairly earning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Now arm ourselves,” cried Gerlind,</span>
					<span>“stand by my son in fight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Strike from your foemen’s helmets</span>
					<span>a glowing, fiery light.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Be always near your master,</span>
					<span>to help him ever striving;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fitly these guests to welcome,</span>
					<span>deep be the wounds that you to them are giving.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to his men said Hartmut:</span>
					<span>“My mother’s words are true;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If you to me are faithful,</span>
					<span>and strive your best to do,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And this day, in the struggle,</span>
					<span>to give your help are ready,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When fathers shall have fallen,</span>
					<span>a friend I’ll be to sons bereft and needy.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand and a hundred</span>
					<span>within King Ludwig’s halls</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now were all well-weaponed.</span>
					<span>Before from out the walls</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Went any thro’ the gateways,</span>
					<span>they left the stronghold guarded;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Still within it posted,</span>
					<span>five hundred warriors brave the castle warded.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On four gates of the castle</span>
					<span>the bolts were backward thrown:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne’er had they been opened</span>
					<span>to a single spur alone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then with the youthful Hartmut,</span>
					<span>outgoing at his bidding,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All with helmets fastened,</span>
					<span>went thirty hundred followers boldly riding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The hour of strife drew nearer.</span>
					<span>He of the Sturmisch land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te, his horn was blowing;</span>
					<span>and loud across the sand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For thirty miles or over,</span>
					<span>men the blast were hearing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fighters of the Hegelings,</span>
					<span>to flock to Hilda’s flag, their arms were wearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Once again he blew it:</span>
					<span>at this should all take heed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That every knight among them</span>
					<span>then should mount his steed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And each his men should gather</span>
					<span>to ride as they were bidden.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A knight so old as Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>and yet so brave, to the fight had never ridden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The third time that he blew it,</span>
					<span>he such a blast did make</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That all the land was shaken,</span>
					<span>and the sea a sound gave back;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Almost from Ludwig’s castle</span>
					<span>the corner-stones were falling:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To raise Queen Hilda’s banner</span>
					<span>Wâ-te to Horant then was loudly calling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They feared old Wâ-te sorely,</span>
					<span>none dared to speak aloud;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A horse was e’en heard neighing.</span>
					<span>Upon the roof now stood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic’s well-belovéd,</span>
					<span>and saw the warriors daring,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Onward proudly riding,</span>
					<span>to wage the fight with Hartmut, nothing fearing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut rode to meet them;</span>
					<span>he and all his men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bearing well their weapons,</span>
					<span>to leave the gates were seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those from the windows gazing</span>
					<span>saw the helmets glisten</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of friends as well as foemen.</span>
					<span>Hartmut not alone to the fight did hasten.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To all four sides of the castle</span>
					<span>the foes their banners bore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bright in hue like silver</span>
					<span>was the armor that they wore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The bosses of their bucklers</span>
					<span>were seen to glitter brightly.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Much was Wâ-te dreaded;</span>
					<span>no lion grim and wild were feared more rightly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The fighters from the Moorland</span>
					<span>were seen apart to ride,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And heavy shafts were hurling;</span>
					<span>splinters were scattered wide.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When with the Norman foemen</span>
					<span>soon the fight did thicken,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sharply from their weapons</span>
					<span>and from their breastplates fiery sparks were stricken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors from Denmark</span>
					<span>near to the castle rode.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There the mighty Irold</span>
					<span>six thousand fighters good</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Up to the walls was leading,</span>
					<span>an onslaught to be making:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brave and daring were they;</span>
					<span>sore ill from them erelong was Ludwig taking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Elsewhere, riding boldly,</span>
					<span>Ortwin his followers led,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No less than eighty hundred;</span>
					<span>sorrow and woe they made</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For many of the Normans,</span>
					<span>and all the land they harried.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gerlind and Ortrun weeping,</span>
					<span>watching the fight from the roof, together tarried.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then came Herwic also,</span>
					<span>betrothed to fair Gu-drun;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Through him full many a woman</span>
					<span>must come to sorrow soon,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When, for his heart’s belovéd,</span>
					<span>he to the fight was springing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beneath the heavy weapons</span>
					<span>were heard the clattering helmets loudly ringing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now came the aged Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>with warriors not a few;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Grim was he and fearless,</span>
					<span>as soon they all well knew.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His spear not yet he lowered</span>
					<span>as he to the walls came riding:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sad was the sight to Gerlind,</span>
					<span>but other were the thoughts Gu-drun was hiding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then came the Norman Hartmut,</span>
					<span>riding before his men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E’en had he been Kaiser,</span>
					<span>never would he be seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bear himself more proudly.</span>
					<span>In the sun was seen to glisten</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All his shining armor.</span>
					<span>His boldness on the field not yet did lessen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When he was seen by Ortwin,</span>
					<span>the lord of Ortland’s throne,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He said: “Will any tell us,</span>
					<span>to whom this knight is known,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who is the daring fighter</span>
					<span>now against us turning?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He shows as bold a bearing</span>
					<span>as if to win a kingdom he were yearning.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said one among them:</span>
					<span>“’Tis Hartmut whom you see;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There indeed is a warrior!</span>
					<span>a daring knight is he.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The selfsame foeman is he</span>
					<span>who erstwhile slew your father.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where’er the strife is raging,</span>
					<span>a bolder man than he there’s not another.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Angrily spake Ortwin:</span>
					<span>“Me for his wrongs he owes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And must atone full dearly</span>
					<span>before from here he goes.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The ills that he has done us</span>
					<span>must he be soon undoing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gerlind cannot help him</span>
					<span>that he from hence may e’er alive be going.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Down upon young Ortwin</span>
					<span>Hartmut riding bore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Altho’ he did not know him,</span>
					<span>deep he plunged his spur;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His horse sprang forward widely,</span>
					<span>against brave Ortwin driven.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both their spears were lowered;</span>
					<span>fire on their armor flashed from spear-strokes given.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>No thrust against the other</span>
					<span>did either leave undone:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The war-horse then of Ortwin</span>
					<span>was on his haunches thrown;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon, too, the steed did stagger</span>
					<span>whereon was Hartmut seated;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They could not bear the onset</span>
					<span>of kings who rushed together, to madness heated.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>High upreared the horses;</span>
					<span>a mighty clang arose</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From clash of kingly sword-blades.</span>
					<span>Thanks were due to those</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who the fight thus opened,</span>
					<span>as knights beseemeth ever.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brave were both and fearless;</span>
					<span>to shrink from one another thought they never.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On both sides came their followers,</span>
					<span>lowering their spears,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bringing death to many;</span>
					<span>each his foeman nears,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in the shock of the onset</span>
					<span>heavy wounds was giving.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All of them were faithful,</span>
					<span>and well for a worthy name they now were striving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand ’gainst a thousand,</span>
					<span>now the strife began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Hartmut’s men with Wâ-te’s,</span>
					<span>each man against his man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon by the lord of Sturmland</span>
					<span>were they so badly treated</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That whoso now came near him</span>
					<span>never a second time with him was mated.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now were thickly mingled</span>
					<span>of foes ten thousand men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Among King Herwic’s warriors;</span>
					<span>they came in anger keen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their mood it was so stubborn</span>
					<span>that rather than be flying</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Far from the field of fighting,</span>
					<span>they on the ground would first in death be lying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A knight indeed was Herwic;</span>
					<span>what daring deeds he did!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Earnest was he in fighting,</span>
					<span>that so the lovely maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Might be to him the kinder.</span>
					<span>But how could he be dreaming</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The boon could e’er befall him,</span>
					<span>that the eyes of fair Gu-drun on him were beaming?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ludwig, king of the Normans,</span>
					<span>and they of the Danish land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now had met together.</span>
					<span>Ludwig bore in hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His strong and heavy weapon;</span>
					<span>lordly was his bearing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet he with all his followers</span>
					<span>to come too far without the walls was daring.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There, with his men from Holstein,</span>
					<span>Fru-te, brave and bold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Slew full many a foeman;</span>
					<span>of this could much be told.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now, too, from the land of Waleis,</span>
					<span>Morunc, many slaying,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before King Ludwig’s castle</span>
					<span>made rich the earth with the dead he low was laying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Irold, the youthful champion,</span>
					<span>a knight both true and good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Slashed thro’ foemen’s armor,</span>
					<span>shedding their hot life-blood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Under Hilda’s banner</span>
					<span>was Wâ-te’s kinsman fighting;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many in death grew paler</span>
					<span>as Horant thinned the crowd he fast was smiting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now the young King Hartmut</span>
					<span>and Ortwin met again.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thicker then than snow-flakes</span>
					<span>blown by the wind are seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The sword-strokes of the warriors</span>
					<span>upon each other lighted:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus it was that Hartmut</span>
					<span>once more by Ortwin on the field was greeted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gu-drun’s young brother, Ortwin,</span>
					<span>was bold and brave enow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Hartmut through his helmet</span>
					<span>smote him a heavy blow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Over his shining breastplate</span>
					<span>soon the blood was streaming:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The followers of Ortwin</span>
					<span>sadly saw the flow, its brightness dimming.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Great was the crush and uproar;</span>
					<span>hand to hand they fought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many wounds were gaping</span>
					<span>thro’ rings of steel well-wrought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many a head had fallen</span>
					<span>beneath the sword-strokes given:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Death was like a robber,</span>
					<span>that from their kin the dearest friends had riven.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now saw the Danish Horant</span>
					<span>that Ortwin from his foe</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A bloody wound had taken;</span>
					<span>then Horant bade them show</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who ’twas that thus had wounded</span>
					<span>his master loved so dearly.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut at this was laughing,</span>
					<span>for both upon the field had met too nearly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwin himself then answered:</span>
					<span>“’Tis Hartmut this has done.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hilda’s banner was given</span>
					<span>by Horant to one of his own;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thinking thus the foeman</span>
					<span>he could harm the better,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And gain himself much honor:</span>
					<span>now he sought his foe with boldness greater.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut heard around him</span>
					<span>a loud and stormy din.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On many of his warriors</span>
					<span>streams of blood were seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fast from wounds out-welling;</span>
					<span>down to their feet ’twas flowing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then cried Hartmut boldly:</span>
					<span>“For this shall you atone, and this be ruing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now he turned him quickly</span>
					<span>where Horant met his sight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then might one be seeing,</span>
					<span>so brave were both in fight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How from their ringed armor</span>
					<span>sparks of fire were flying;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Blunted were the sword-blades</span>
					<span>which they on each other’s helmets fast were plying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hartmut wounded Horant,</span>
					<span>even as he had done</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not long before to Ortwin;</span>
					<span>a ruddy stream full soon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ran from out his armor,</span>
					<span>at Hartmut’s hand forth welling.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Strong indeed was his foeman;</span>
					<span>who now to win his lands could hope be feeling?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then in bitter struggle</span>
					<span>many, on either side,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Saw their bucklers shattered,</span>
					<span>tho’ strong and often tried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beaten were they and broken</span>
					<span>by sword-strokes quickly given</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By each upon the other.</span>
					<span>Well to guard himself had Hartmut striven.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now the friends of Ortwin,</span>
					<span>and those of Horant, too,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Away from the field did lead them;</span>
					<span>and care did they bestow</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bind their wounds wide-gaping;</span>
					<span>no time for this they wasted.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then again to the war-field</span>
					<span>the knights both rode; once more to the strife they hasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>We now must leave them fighting</span>
					<span>as bravely as they will.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who the day was winning,</span>
					<span>or whom his foe did kill,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before King Ludwig’s castle,</span>
					<span>none could yet be saying.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Grimly strove the Normans;</span>
					<span>their foes, not less, for fame were strength outlaying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of all that there befell them</span>
					<span>none may ever tell;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But ’tis not yet forgotten</span>
					<span>that many a knight there fell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On every side were sword-blades</span>
					<span>heard together ringing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Foemen all were mingled,</span>
					<span>the slow with those who quick in fight were springing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te stood not idle,</span>
					<span>that can I well believe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He bade farewell to many,</span>
					<span>nor longer let them live;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Cut down by him in the struggle,</span>
					<span>were they before him lying.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fain were Hartmut’s kinsmen</span>
					<span>to wreak their wrath for friends who there were dying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now came Herwic nearer,</span>
					<span>so the tale is told,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And led against King Ludwig</span>
					<span>many a champion bold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He saw that aged warrior</span>
					<span>his weapons bravely bearing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where he with all his liegemen,</span>
					<span>a wondrous host of foes beat down, unsparing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Herwic called out loudly:</span>
					<span>“Can any one now tell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who is that fighting graybeard,</span>
					<span>who all his foes doth fell?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Deepest wounds for many</span>
					<span>there his hand is hewing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With bravery so fearless:</span>
					<span>women in tears will this erelong be ruing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When this was heard by Ludwig,</span>
					<span>outspoke that Norman foe:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Who in the midst of battle</span>
					<span>seeks my name to know?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I bear the name of Ludwig:</span>
					<span>for Normandy I’m fighting;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Could I but meet my foemen,</span>
					<span>them indeed would I be sorely smiting.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake to him King Herwic:</span>
					<span>“This thou well dost earn:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing thou art Ludwig,</span>
					<span>with hate for thee I burn.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For us, upon the sand-drifts,</span>
					<span>many knights thou wast slaying:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou slewest Hettel also;</span>
					<span>a warrior brave was he, beyond all saying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Still further thou hast wronged us,</span>
					<span>before thy day was done:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this we still are mourning.</span>
					<span>I for my loss have known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Heart-heaviness and sorrow:</span>
					<span>thou hast my lady stolen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From me upon the Wulpensand;</span>
					<span>and many knights for her in death have fallen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“I bear the name of Herwic:</span>
					<span>thou hast taken my hoped-for wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And again to me must give her;</span>
					<span>else to give his life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With that of many a liegeman,</span>
					<span>must one of us be willing.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then King Ludwig answered:</span>
					<span>“Too boldly thou in my land in threats art dealing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Thy name, and this thy warning,</span>
					<span>thou hast no need to tell;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There yet are many others</span>
					<span>from whom I took, as well,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their goods and eke their kinsmen.</span>
					<span>To trust my word be ready,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In this I will not falter;</span>
					<span>thou nevermore may’st hope to kiss thy lady.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they thus had spoken,</span>
					<span>the kings no more did rest,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But sprang upon each other.</span>
					<span>If either got the best,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To hold it was not easy;</span>
					<span>youths were forward pushing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Under both the standards,</span>
					<span>and daring knights to help their lords were rushing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A fearless king was Herwic,</span>
					<span>and long and bravely fought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But quickly Hartmut’s father</span>
					<span>the youthful Herwic smote,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till he began to stagger</span>
					<span>’neath blows by Ludwig given,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who gladly would have slain him,</span>
					<span>or would from out his lands his foe have driven.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>If Herwic’s faithful followers</span>
					<span>so near him had not been,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And given help so quickly,</span>
					<span>never could he, I ween,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Have freed himself from Ludwig,</span>
					<span>or left the field yet living;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So well that aged warrior</span>
					<span>to make young Herwic dread him now was striving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But help to him was granted,</span>
					<span>his life he did not lose;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, neither stunned nor wounded,</span>
					<span>he from his fall arose.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the roof quick turning,</span>
					<span>his eyes he now was raising,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To see if, ’mongst the ladies,</span>
					<span>his heart’s beloved had on his fall been gazing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
