<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tale VII: How the Maidens Came to See the Ship, and Were Carried to Hettel’s Kingdom</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="tale-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Tale</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">How the Maidens Came to See the Ship, and Were Carried to Hettel’s Kingdom</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hilda, with her father and mother and her maidens, rides down to the shore; she and the maidens go on board the ship. While Hagen’s attention is occupied, the vessel sets sail, and they arrive in Hettel’s land.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Early on the morrow,</span>
					<span>after the mass was said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To don their richest clothing</span>
					<span>strove each wife and maid:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A throng of these King Hagen</span>
					<span>to the sandy shore was leading;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with them riding gayly</span>
					<span>a thousand stalwart Irish knights were speeding.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Within the town of Ballian</span>
					<span>the guests had heard the mass.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all the woe and sorrow,</span>
					<span>that soon would come to pass,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hagen as yet knew nothing:</span>
					<span>little honor was left him</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By his guests’ withdrawal;</span>
					<span>this of his fair and well-born child bereft him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When now they all had ridden</span>
					<span>to the ships upon the strand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Queen Hilda and her ladies</span>
					<span>were lifted down on the sand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The young and lovely maidens</span>
					<span>to see the ships were taken:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The traders’ booths were open,</span>
					<span>and the goods did wonder great in the queen awaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Many fair-wrought jewels</span>
					<span>lay in sight in the shops,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such as men prize highly;</span>
					<span>King Hagen to see them stops,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many with him also:</span>
					<span>soon as the goods were shown them,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The maidens, too, must see them,</span>
					<span>and rings and bands of gold were pressed upon them.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To see the sights King Hagen</span>
					<span>into a boat had gone:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not all the booths were open,</span>
					<span>nor all the goods were shown,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When Wâ-te’s men heaved anchor</span>
					<span>up from the sea-sands deftly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Hilda with her maidens</span>
					<span>was borne away from the land of her fathers swiftly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For no one’s hate and anger</span>
					<span>Wâ-te greatly cares;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Little he recks what happens</span>
					<span>to the shops of costly wares:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hilda, the queenly mother,</span>
					<span>was sundered from her daughter;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men, in the ship long hidden,</span>
					<span>up-sprang and sorrow made for Hagen on the water.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the sails were hoisted,</span>
					<span>and ’twas seen that they were set:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From the ship they threw the foemen,</span>
					<span>who thoroughly were wet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Like sea-birds on the water,</span>
					<span>when near the sands they flutter.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For her daughter dear-belovèd</span>
					<span>sorrow and anger the queen aloud did utter.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When the weaponed fighters</span>
					<span>by Hagen there were seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, in truth, how scornful</span>
					<span>and wrathful was his mien!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“Now bring to me my long-spear,</span>
					<span>to feel it I will teach them;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They all shall die full quickly</span>
					<span>when my strong right arm with that shall reach them!”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Boldly then spoke Morunc:</span>
					<span>“Be not so much in haste!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though now you think to fight us,</span>
					<span>and to rush on us so fast</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With a thousand well-armed foemen,</span>
					<span>we yet will overthrow them,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And fling them into the water;</span>
					<span>a damp, cold lodging we will quickly show them!”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Still, brave Hagen’s followers</span>
					<span>the fight would not give o’er;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The water shone and glistened</span>
					<span>with the armor that they wore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then they drew their long-swords,</span>
					<span>spears were thickly flying;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But oars were dipped full quickly,</span>
					<span>and fast the boats away from the shore were hieing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The bold and daring Wâ-te</span>
					<span>from the sands had given a bound</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Into a well-manned row-boat;</span>
					<span>loud did his mail resound,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As he, with fifty warriors,</span>
					<span>after Hilda hasted:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hagen’s careless followers</span>
					<span>now must rouse themselves, no time they wasted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Onward came King Hagen;</span>
					<span>his fighting-gear he wore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And a heavy sword, the sharpest,</span>
					<span>he proudly with him bore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But now the aged Wâ-te</span>
					<span>almost too long had waited;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wild and grim was Hagen,</span>
					<span>and high his spear he raised ’gainst his foe belated.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Loudly then he shouted,</span>
					<span>and bade his men make haste;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>None of all his followers</span>
					<span>would he allow to rest,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hoping these guests, now fleeing,</span>
					<span>who had been such traitors,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Might be with speed o’ertaken,</span>
					<span>and either should be slain, or bound in fetters.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king had now about him</span>
					<span>fighters many and brave,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But yet he could not follow</span>
					<span>across the wild sea-wave;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His ships were all unready,</span>
					<span>and many of them leaking,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When now he would be sailing;</span>
					<span>of Hagen’s blame for this were all soon speaking.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On the gravelly sea-shore standing,</span>
					<span>no other way he knew</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But that more ships be builded</span>
					<span>for him and his liegemen true,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And workmen called together,</span>
					<span>who must therein be speedy:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All came who now were able,</span>
					<span>and these he found to be both skilled and ready.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the seventh morning,</span>
					<span>there left the Irish land</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men sent forth by Hettel</span>
					<span>to ask for Hilda’s hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bring to him the lady.</span>
					<span>They were a thousand barely;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hagen brought against them</span>
					<span>thirty hundred men, if reckoned fairly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The daring knights of Denmark</span>
					<span>sent men home before,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To carry word to Hettel</span>
					<span>that Hagen’s child they bore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And to his land would bring her,</span>
					<span>with honor him befitting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though now they little thought it,</span>
					<span>still harder work erelong must they be meeting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To them their master, Hettel,</span>
					<span>in happy mood then spoke:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>“My sorrows now are over.</span>
					<span>Great toils my liegemen took</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For me in Hagen’s kingdom,</span>
					<span>and now have brought me gladness;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since they on their errand left me,</span>
					<span>fear for their doom has filled my heart with sadness.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“Dear friends, if with your tidings</span>
					<span>you have not me betrayed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And do not tell me falsely</span>
					<span>that you have seen the maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Near to my land and kingdom,</span>
					<span>and in my friends’ safe-keeping,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For your tale will I reward you,</span>
					<span>and gladly will your praise be ever speaking.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They said: “No lie we tell you,</span>
					<span>that we the maid have seen;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But when we miles had measured,</span>
					<span>the daughter of the queen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sadly said, for our welfare</span>
					<span>she feared, and was heavy-hearted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest the king, her father,</span>
					<span>to follow with his ships e’en then had started.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For the tidings, Hettel gave them</span>
					<span>a hundred marks in worth;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For all his knights there gathered,</span>
					<span>men at once brought forth</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Swords as well as helmets,</span>
					<span>and shields for them were bidden:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus from Hettel’s castle</span>
					<span>they went, as if to court, to bring the maiden.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All the men he was able</span>
					<span>Hettel for this now sought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Greatly was he hoping,</span>
					<span>and much thereof he thought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So great a host to muster,</span>
					<span>and these so well outfitted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That never to king’s fair daughter</span>
					<span>so fine a welcome might again be meted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In haste were all then bidden</span>
					<span>who ought with him to go;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They still made ready slowly,</span>
					<span>till gifts he should bestow</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all things that they needed;</span>
					<span>they for this were waiting.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At length by him were gathered</span>
					<span>a thousand men or more, for Hilda’s greeting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gay were they in clothing⁠—</span>
					<span>’gainst this could none say nay⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Poor as well as wealthy</span>
					<span>were shining in war-array:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bring the lovely ladies</span>
					<span>to their new home and dwelling</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were Hettel’s lieges earnest;</span>
					<span>with lofty hopes of this their hearts were swelling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon as they left the castle,</span>
					<span>shouts the land did fill,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As they their way were making</span>
					<span>thro’ lowland and o’er hill;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Men saw upon the pathways</span>
					<span>crowds still thronging nearer:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel hastened forward,</span>
					<span>to see the maid, than every other dearer.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>At last the aged Wâ-te,</span>
					<span>the knight from the Sturmisch land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had reached the Waalisch marches</span>
					<span>and stepped upon the sand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There on the shore were gathered</span>
					<span>the sailors, water-weary;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shelter they sought for Hilda,</span>
					<span>and in a friendly land were glad to tarry.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Stakes for tents were driven</span>
					<span>near to the broad sea-flood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By the followers of Wâ-te;</span>
					<span>they were in happy mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erelong the news was bruited,</span>
					<span>and soon to them was given,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Hettel, king of the Hegelings,</span>
					<span>had left his home, and now was near them even;</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And that he with many liegemen</span>
					<span>was riding down to the shore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To meet his well-belovèd.</span>
					<span>Now hoped the maids the more</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she with greatest honor</span>
					<span>should, as her birth befitted,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Be brought into his kingdom.</span>
					<span>No more the thought of strife their hearts affrighted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The guests for nothing wanted,</span>
					<span>they had both wine and food;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those who were living near them</span>
					<span>freely on them bestowed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The best that they were able;</span>
					<span>the wants of all they heeded;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate’er they had they gave them,</span>
					<span>and left them not to lack for aught they needed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel now drew nearer</span>
					<span>to those who had reached his land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with him, gathered hastily,</span>
					<span>the strong and goodly band,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Drawn from his father’s kingdom.</span>
					<span>They came bedecked so gaily,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in such glittering armor,</span>
					<span>the guests looked on full glad, and praised them freely.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the men of the Hegelings</span>
					<span>came down upon the plain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And soon the rushing riders</span>
					<span>a tilting-match began;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All with youthful boldness</span>
					<span>for knightly prizes striving:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then came the Danish Fru-te,</span>
					<span>and with him Wâ-te, wise as any living.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They were seen from afar by Hettel;</span>
					<span>happy in heart was he.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His horse he set a-prancing;</span>
					<span>right glad was he to see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Two of his bravest liegemen,</span>
					<span>sent by him o’er the water,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With fighters bold to Ireland,</span>
					<span>in hopes to win for him wild Hagen’s daughter.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On him, too, looked they gladly,</span>
					<span>their worthy king, so good;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Each day they spent there with him</span>
					<span>found them in happy mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wâ-te with all his fellows,</span>
					<span>while far away they were living,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had known much bitter hardship:</span>
					<span>for this would Hettel now reward be giving.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As he met his friendly liegemen,</span>
					<span>King Hettel wore a smile;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said he to them kindly:</span>
					<span>“Much have I feared erewhile</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For you, my faithful helpers,</span>
					<span>and a heavy heart was bearing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest in Hagen’s castles</span>
					<span>my men were held, and all were bondage sharing.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then for love he kissed them,</span>
					<span>both those gray old men;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His eyes had never rested</span>
					<span>on so glad a sight as then,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor on a fairer pasture</span>
					<span>had fed, with longing fonder.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween that never to Hettel</span>
					<span>was aught so full of bliss and sudden wonder.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the aged Wâ-te:</span>
					<span>No harm to us was done;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But yet a sway so mighty</span>
					<span>I ne’er before have known,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As this that wild King Hagen</span>
					<span>over his lands now wieldeth:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His followers bear them proudly,</span>
					<span>and he himself in strength to no one yieldeth.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>“It was a day as happy</span>
					<span>as ever could be thought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When we to you sent tidings</span>
					<span>that we had Hilda brought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The loveliest of maidens</span>
					<span>(no falsehood have I spoken,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Believe the tale I tell you)</span>
					<span>that ever in this world my eyes did look on.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The high-born knight then added:</span>
					<span>“Belike with greatest speed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Will come these daring foemen;</span>
					<span>for this should you take heed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest the angry Hagen</span>
					<span>soon shall overtake us</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Here within your marches;</span>
					<span>if so, his hatred bitter woe will make us.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Wâ-te and Sir Fru-te</span>
					<span>down to the shore did bring</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many worthy followers,</span>
					<span>knights of Hettel, the king,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There to see fair Hilda,</span>
					<span>and there must they await her.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon their shining bucklers</span>
					<span>many a spear-shaft crashed in battle later.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now came the fair young maiden,</span>
					<span>under a comely hat;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then all the men of the Hegelings</span>
					<span>who on their horses sat</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By the side of the king, their master,</span>
					<span>upon the grass alighted.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With merry hearts then gladly</span>
					<span>the well-bred throng their love and friendship plighted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Irold, he of Ortland,</span>
					<span>and Morunc of the Frisian land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both of those brave champions,</span>
					<span>one on either hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Came with lovely Hilda,</span>
					<span>and Hettel soon were meeting;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Worthy was she of praises.</span>
					<span>Now thought the maid to give the king her greeting.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With her there came young maidens,</span>
					<span>twenty or even more,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All clad in fair white linen⁠—</span>
					<span>whiter none e’er wore⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or best of silken clothing,</span>
					<span>that could be found by any:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Proud were they to wear them,</span>
					<span>and, gaily decked, they there were seen by many.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king, both good and stately,</span>
					<span>then began to greet</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With well-bred, seemly bearing,</span>
					<span>the maid he thought was meet</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wear the crown hereafter.</span>
					<span>He gazed on her with yearning;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her in his arms he folded,</span>
					<span>and fondly kissed the maid, her face upturning.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then one by one he welcomed</span>
					<span>all the maidens fair;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But one there was among them</span>
					<span>so lofty in her air</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She might of birth be kingly:</span>
					<span>in nought her kin were lacking.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She was one of the maidens</span>
					<span>who with the griffin long her home was making.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She bore the name of Hildeburg:</span>
					<span>from Hilda, Hagen’s wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She ever had won the honor</span>
					<span>befitting her worthy life;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Born in the land of Portugal,</span>
					<span>thence had she been taken.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She now saw many strangers:</span>
					<span>a longing sad for her friends did this awaken.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hettel to all the maidens</span>
					<span>gave a welcome free,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet was their lot no brighter;</span>
					<span>for when they thought to see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>An end of all their sadness,</span>
					<span>upon the coming morrow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon as the day was dawning,</span>
					<span>there came to them again as great a sorrow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Her throng of high-born followers</span>
					<span>were greeted on every side;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Near to Hagen’s daughter</span>
					<span>on a flowery meadow wide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Under silken awnings,</span>
					<span>many there were seated.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Hagen was now too near them;</span>
					<span>to them from him must many ills be meted.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
